Sanditon
Jane Austen
This file is free for individual use only. It must not be altered or resold.
Organisations wishing to use it must first obtain a licence.
Low cost licenses are available. Contact us through our web site 
© The Electric Book Co 1998
The Electric Book Company Ltd
20 Cambridge Drive, London SE12 8AJ, UK
www.elecbook.com
ELECBOOK CLASSICS
ebc0050. Jane Austen: Sanditon
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                       ElecBook
3
Sanditon
Chapter I. En route to the coast, Mr and Mrs Parker’s
carriage overturned at Willingden; assisted
by the Heywoods   4
Chapter II. Sanditon the home and enthusiasm of Mr
Parker; Charlotte Heywood to accompany them there 13
Chapter III. Lady Denham, the grand lady of Sanditon,
and her niece Miss Brereton described 18
Chapter IV. The travellers arrive in Sanditon 24
Chapter V. Mr Parker’s relations described; a letter
from the sickly siblings 30
Chapter VI. Charlotte meets Lady Denham and
Clara Brereton 35
Chapter VII. Charlotte meets the young Denhams
and discovers Lady D. to be mean 41
Chapter VIII. Charlotte finds Sir Edward Denham vain
and pretentious; with designs on Clara Brereton 51
Chapter IX. The Parker siblings arrive at Sanditon 55
Chapter X. An evening with the Parkers 62
Chapter XI. The “Camberwell Seminary” arrives
at Sanditon 71
Chapter XII. Sidney Parker arrives in Sanditon;
Charlotte visits Sanditon House 75
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
4
SANDITON
CHAPTER I
 Gentleman and Lady travelling from Tunbridge towards
that part of the Sussex Coast which lies between Hastings
and E. Bourne, being induced by Business to quit the high
road, and attempt a very rough Lane, were overturned in toiling
up its long ascent half rock, half sand. The accident happened just
beyond the only Gentleman’s House near the Lane—a House,
which their Driver on being first required to take that direction,
had conceived to be necessarily their object, and had with most
unwilling Looks been constrained to pass by. He had grumbled
and shaken his shoulders so much indeed, and pitied and cut his
Horses so sharply, that he might have been open to the suspicion
of overturning them on purpose (especially as the Carriage was
not his Masters own) if the road had not indisputably become
considerably worse than before, as soon as the premises of the
said House were left behind—expressing with a most intelligent
portentous countenance that beyond it no wheels but cart wheels
could safely proceed. The severity of the fall was broken by their
slow pace and the narrowness of the Lane, and the Gentleman
having scrambled out and helped out his companion, they neither
of them at first felt more than shaken and bruised. But the
A
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
5
Gentleman had in the course of the extrication sprained his foot—
and soon becoming sensible of it, was obliged in a few moments to
cut short, both his remonstrance to the Driver and his
congratulations to his wife and himself—and sit down on the bank,
unable to stand.—‘There is something wrong here,’ said he—
putting his hand to his ancle—‘But never mind, my Dear (looking
up at her with a smile)—It could not have happened, you know, in
a better place.—Good out of Evil—. The very thing perhaps to be
wished for. We shall soon get relief.—There, I fancy lies my cure’—
pointing to the neat-looking end of a Cottage, which was seen
romantically situated among wood on a high Eminence at some
little Distance—‘Does not that promise to be the very place?’—His
wife fervently hoped it was—but stood, terrified and anxious,
neither able to do or suggest anything—and receiving her first real
comfort from the sight of several persons now coming to their
assistance. The accident had been discerned from a Hayfield
adjoining the House they had passed—and the persons who
approached, were a well-looking Hale, Gentlemanlike Man, of
middle age, the Proprietor of the Place, who happened to be
among his Haymakers at the time, and three or four of the ablest
of them summoned to attend their Master—to say nothing of all
the rest of the field, Men, Women and Children—not very far off.—
Mr. Heywood, such was the name of the said Proprietor, advanced
with a very civil salutation—much concern for the accident—some
surprise at any body’s attempting that road in a Carriage—and
ready offers of assistance. His courtesies were received with Good-
breeding and gratitude and while one or two of the Men lent their
help to the Driver in getting the Carriage upright again, the
Travellor said—‘You are extremely obliging Sir, and I take you at
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
6
your word.—The injury to my Leg is I dare say very trifling, but it
is always best in these cases to have a surgeon’s opinion without
loss of time; and as the road does not seem at present in a
favourable state for my getting up to his house myself, I will thank
you to send off one of these good People for the Surgeon.’ ‘The
Surgeon Sir!’—replied Mr. Heywood—‘I am afraid you will find no
surgeon at hand here, but I dare say we shall do very well without
him.’—‘Nay Sir, if he is not in the way, his Partner will do just as
well—or rather better—. I would rather see his Partner indeed—I
would prefer the attendance of his Partner.—One of these good
people can be with him in three minutes I am sure. I need not ask
whether I see the House; (looking towards the Cottage) for
excepting your own, we have passed none in this place, which can
be the Abode of a Gentleman.’—Mr. H. looked very much
astonished—and replied—‘What Sir! are you expecting to find a
Surgeon in that Cottage?—We have neither Surgeon nor Partner
in the Parish I assure you.’—‘Excuse me Sir’—replied the other. ‘I
am sorry to have the appearance of contradicting you—but though
from the extent of the Parish or some other cause you may not be
aware of the fact;—Stay—Can I be mistaken in the place?—Am I
not in Willingden?—Is not this Willingden?’ ‘Yes Sir, this is
certainly Willingden.’ ‘Then Sir, I can bring proof of your having a
Surgeon in the Parish—whether you may know it or not. Here
Sir—(taking out his Pocket book) if you will do me the favour of
casting your eye over these advertisements, which I cut out myself
from the Morning Post and the Kentish Gazette, only yesterday
morning in London—I think you will be convinced that I am not
speaking at random. You will find it an advertisement Sir, of the
dissolution of a Partnership in the Medical Line—in your own
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
7
Parish—extensive Business—undeniable Character—respectable
references—wishing to form a separate Establishment—You will
find it at full length Sir’—offering him the two little oblong
extracts.—‘Sir’—said Mr. Heywood with a good humoured smile—
‘if you were to shew me all the Newspapers that are printed in one
week throughout the Kingdom, you would not persuade me of
there being a Surgeon in Willingden,—for having lived here ever
since I was born, Man and Boy fifty-seven years, I think I must
have known of such a person, at least I may venture to say that he
has not much Business—To be sure, if Gentlemen were to be often
attempting this Lane in Post-chaises, it might not be a bad
speculation for a Surgeon to get a House at the top of the Hill—
But as to that Cottage, I can assure you Sir that it is in fact—
(inspite of its spruce air at this distance—) as indifferent a double
Tenement as any in the Parish, and that my Shepherd lives at one
end, and three old women at the other.’ He took the pieces of
paper as he spoke—and having looked them over, added—‘I
believe I can explain it Sir.—Your mistake is in the place.—There
are two Willingdens in this Country—and your advertisements
refer to the other—which is Great Willingden, or Willingden
Abbots, and lies seven miles off; on the other side of Battel—quite
down in the Weald. And we Sir—’ (speaking rather proudly) ‘are
not in the Weald.’—‘Not down in the Weald I am sure Sir,’ replied
the Traveller, pleasantly. ‘It took us half an hour to climb your
Hill.—Well Sir—I dare say it is as you say, and I have made an
abominably stupid Blunder.—All done in a moment;—the
advertisements did not catch my eye till the last half hour of our
being in Town;—when everything was in the hurry and confusion
which always attend a short stay there—One is never able to
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
8
complete anything in the way of Business you know till the
Carriage is at the door—and accordingly satisfying myself with a
brief enquiry, and finding we were actually to pass within a mile
or two of a Willingden, I sought no farther... My Dear—’ (to his
wife) ‘I am very sorry to have brought you into this Scrape. But do
not be alarmed about my Leg. It gives me no pain while I am
quiet,—and as soon as these good people have succeeded in
setting the Carriage to rights and turning the Horses round, the
best thing we can do will be to measure back our steps into the
Turnpike road and proceed to Hailsham, and so Home, without
attempting anything farther.—Two hours take us home, from
Hailsham—And when once at home, we have our remedy at hand
you know.—A little of our own Bracing Sea Air will soon set me on
my feet again.—Depend upon it my Dear, it is exactly a case for
the Sea. Saline air and immersion will be the very thing.—My
sensations tell me so already.’—In a most friendly manner Mr.
Heywood here interposed, entreating them not to think of
proceeding till the ancle had been examined, and some
refreshment taken, and very cordially pressing them to make use
of his House for both purposes.—‘We are always well stocked,’
said he, ‘with all the common remedies for sprains and Bruises—
and I will answer for the pleasure it will give my Wife and
daughters to be of service to you and this Lady in every way in
their power.’—A twinge or two, in trying to move his foot disposed
the Travellor to think rather more as he had done at first of the
benefit of immediate assistance—and consulting his wife in the
few words of ‘Well my Dear, I believe it will be better for us.’—
turned again to Mr. H—and said—‘Before we accept your
Hospitality Sir,—and in order to do away with any unfavourable
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
9
impression which the sort of wild goose-chace you find me in, may
have given rise to—allow me to tell you who we are. My name is
Parker.—Mr. Parker of Sanditon; this Lady, my wife Mrs.
Parker.—We are on our road home from London;—My name
perhaps—tho’ I am by no means the first of my Family, holding
Landed Property in the Parish of Sanditon, may be unknown at
this distance from the Coast—but Sanditon itself—everybody has
heard of Sanditon,—the favourite—for a young and rising
Bathing-place, certainly the favourite spot of all that are to be
found along the coast of Sussex;—the most favoured by Nature,
and promising to be the most chosen by Man.’—‘Yes—I have
heard of Sanditon.’ replied Mr. H.—‘Every five years, one hears of
some new place or other starting up by the Sea, and growing the
fashion.—How they can half of them be filled, is the wonder!
Where People can be found with Money or Time to go to them!—
Bad things for a Country;—sure to raise the price of Provisions
and make the poor good for nothing—as I dare say you find, Sir.’
‘Not at all Sir, not at all’—cried Mr. Parker eagerly. ‘Quite the
contrary I assure you.—A common idea—but a mistaken one. It
may apply to your large, overgrown Places, like Brighton, or
Worthing, or East Bourne—but not to a small Village like
Sanditon, precluded by its size from experiencing any of the evils
of Civilization, while the growth of the place, the Buildings, the
Nursery Grounds, the demand for every thing, and the sure resort
of the very best Company, those regular, steady, private Families
of thorough Gentility and Character, who are a blessing
everywhere, excite the industry of the Poor and diffuse comfort
and improvement among them of every sort.—No Sir, I assure
you, Sanditon is not a place—’ ‘I do not mean to take exceptions to
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
10
any place in particular Sir,’ answered Mr. H.—‘I only think our
Coast is too full of them altogether—But had we not better try to
get you’—‘Our Coast too full’—repeated Mr. P.—‘On that point
perhaps we may not totally disagree;—at least there are enough.
Our Coast is abundant enough; it demands no more.—Every
body’s Taste and every body’s finances may be suited. And those
good people who are trying to add to the number, are in my
opinion excessively absurd, and must soon find themselves the
Dupes of their own fallacious Calculations.—Such a place as
Sanditon Sir, I may say was wanted, was called for.—Nature had
marked it out—had spoken in most intelligible Characters. The
finest, purest Sea Breeze on the Coast—acknowledged to be so—
Excellent Bathing—fine hard Sand—Deep Water ten yards from
the Shore—no Mud—no Weeds—no slimey rocks—Never was
there a place more palpably designed by Nature for the resort of
the Invalid—the very Spot which Thousands seemed in need of.—
The most desirable distance from London! One complete,
measured mile nearer than East Bourne. Only conceive Sir, the
advantage of saving a whole Mile, in a long Journey. But
Brinshore Sir, which I dare say you have in your eye—the
attempts of two or three speculating People about Brinshore, this
last Year, to raise that paltry Hamlet, lying, as it does between a
stagnant marsh, a bleak Moor and the constant effluvia of a ridge
of putrifying sea weed, can end in nothing but their own
Disappointment. What in the name of Common Sense is to
recommend Brinshore?—A most insalubrious Air—Roads
proverbially detestable—Water Brackish beyond example,
impossible to get a good dish of Tea within three miles of the
place—and as for the Soil—it is so cold and ungrateful that it can
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
11
hardly be made to yield a Cabbage.—Depend upon it Sir, that this
is a faithful Description of Brinshore—not in the smallest degree
exaggerated—and if you have heard it differently spoken of—’ ‘Sir
I never heard it spoken of in my Life before,’ said Mr. Heywood. ‘I
did not know there was such a place in the World.’ ‘You did not!—
There my Dear—(turning with exultation to his Wife)—you see
how it is. So much for the Celebrity of Brinshore!—This
Gentleman did not know there was such a place in the World.—
Why, in truth Sir, I fancy we may apply to Brinshore, that line of
the Poet Cowper in his description of the religious Cottager, as
opposed to Voltaire—“She, never heard of half a mile from
home.”’—‘With all my Heart Sir—Apply any Verses you like to it—
But I want to see something applied to your Leg—and I am sure
by your Lady’s countenance that she is quite of my opinion and
thinks it a pity to lose any more time—And here come my Girls to
speak for themselves and their Mother (two or three genteel
looking young Women followed by as many Maid servants, were
now seen issueing from the House)—I began to wonder the Bustle
should not have reached them.—A thing of this kind soon makes a
Stir in a lonely place like ours.—Now Sir, let us see how you can
be best conveyed into the House.’—The young Ladies approached
and said every thing that was proper to recommend their Father’s
offers; and in an unaffected manner calculated to make the
Strangers easy.—And as Mrs. P. was exceedingly anxious for
relief—and her Husband by this time, not much less disposed for
it—a very few civil scruples were enough—especially as the
Carriage being now set up, was discovered to have received such
Injury on the fallen side as to be unfit for present use.—Mr. Parker
was therefore carried into the House, and his Carriage wheeled off
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
12
to a vacant Barn.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
13
CHAPTER II
he acquaintance, thus oddly begun, was neither short nor
unimportant. For a whole fortnight the Travellors were
fixed at Willingden; Mr. P.’s sprain proving too serious for
him to move sooner.—He had fallen into very good hands. The
Heywoods were a thoroughly respectable family, and every
possible attention was paid in the kindest and most unpretending
manner, to both Husband and wife. He was waited on and nursed,
and she cheered and comforted with unremitting kindness—and
as every office of Hospitality and friendliness was received as it
ought—as there was not more good will on one side than
Gratitude on the other—nor any deficiency of generally pleasant
manners on either, they grew to like each other in the course of
that fortnight, exceedingly well.—Mr. Parker’s Character and
History were soon unfolded. All that he understood of himself, he
readily told, for he was very openhearted;—and where he might be
himself in the dark, his conversation was still giving information,
to such of the Heywoods as could observe.—By such he was
perceived to be an Enthusiast;—on the subject of Sanditon, a
complete Enthusiast.—Sanditon,—the success of Sanditon as a
small, fashionable Bathing Place was the object, for which he
seemed to live. A very few years ago, and it had been a quiet
Village of no pretensions; but some natural advantages in its
position and some accidental circumstances having suggested to
himself, and the other principal Land Holder, the probability of its
becoming a profitable Speculation, they had engaged in it, and
T
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
14
planned and built, and praised and puffed, and raised it to a
Something of young Renown—and Mr. Parker could now think of
very little besides.—The Facts, which in more direct
communication, he laid before them were that he was about five
and thirty—had been married,—very happily married seven
years—and had four sweet Children at home;—that he was of a
respectable Family, and easy though not large fortune;—no
Profession—succeeding as eldest son to the Property which two or
three Generations had been holding and accumulating before
him;—that he had two Brothers and two Sisters—all single and all
independant—the eldest of the two former indeed, by collateral
Inheritance, quite as well provided for as himself.—His object in
quitting the high road, to hunt for an advertising Surgeon, was
also plainly stated;—it had not proceeded from any intention of
spraining his ancle or doing himself any other Injury for the good
of such Surgeon—nor (as Mr H. had been apt to suppose) from
any design of entering into Partnership with him—; it was merely
in consequence of a wish to establish some medical Man at
Sanditon, which the nature of the Advertisement induced him to
expect to accomplish in Willingden.—He was convinced that the
advantage of a medical Man at hand would very materially
promote the rise and prosperity of the Place—would in fact tend to
bring a prodigious influx;—nothing else was wanting. He had
strong reason to believe that one family had been deterred last
year from trying Sanditon on that account—and probably very
many more—and his own Sisters who were sad Invalids, and
whom he was very anxious to get to Sanditon this Summer, could
hardly be expected to hazard themselves in a place where they
could not have immediate medical advice.—Upon the whole, Mr.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
15
P. was evidently an amiable, family-man, fond of Wife, Children,
Brothers and Sisters—and generally kind-hearted;—Liberal,
gentlemanlike, easy to please;—of a sanguine turn of mind, with
more Imagination than Judgement. And Mrs. P. was as evidently a
gentle, amiable, sweet tempered Woman, the properest wife in the
World for a Man of strong Understanding, but not of capacity to
supply the cooler reflection which her own Husband sometimes
needed, and so entirely waiting to be guided on every occasion,
that whether he were risking his Fortune or spraining his Ancle,
she remained equally useless.—Sanditon was a second Wife and
four Children to him—hardly less Dear—and certainly more
engrossing.—He could talk of it for ever.—It had indeed the
highest claims;—not only those of Birthplace, Property, and
Home,—it was his Mine, his Lottery, his Speculation and his
Hobby Horse; his Occupation his Hope and his Futurity.—He was
extremely desirous of drawing his good friends at Willingden
thither; and his endeavours in the cause, were as grateful and
disinterested, as they were warm. He wanted to secure the
promise of a visit—to get as many of the Family as his own house
would contain, to follow him to Sanditon as soon as possible—and
healthy as they all undeniably were—foresaw that every one of
them would be benefited by the sea.—He held it indeed as certain,
that no person could be really well, no person, (however upheld
for the present by fortuitous aids of exercise and spirits in a
semblance of Health) could be really in a state of secure and
permanent Health without spending at least six weeks by the Sea
every year.—The Sea air and Sea Bathing together were nearly
infallible, one or the other of them being a match for every
Disorder, of the Stomach, the Lungs or the Blood; They were anti-
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
16
spasmodic, anti-pulmonary, anti-sceptic, anti-bilious and anti-
rheumatic. Nobody could catch cold by the Sea, Nobody wanted
Appetite by the Sea, Nobody wanted Spirits, Nobody wanted
Strength.—They were healing, softing, relaxing—fortifying and
bracing—seemingly just as was wanted—sometimes one,
sometimes the other.—If the Sea breeze failed, the Sea-Bath was
the certain corrective;—and where Bathing disagreed, the Sea
Breeze alone was evidently designed by Nature for the cure.—His
eloquence however could not prevail. Mr. and Mrs. H. never left
home. Marrying early and having a very numerous Family, their
movements had been long limited to one small circle; and they
were older in Habits than in Age.—Excepting two Journeys to
London in the year, to receive his Dividends, Mr. H. went no
farther than his feet or his well-tried old Horse could carry him,
and Mrs. Heywood’s Adventurings were only now and then to visit
her Neighbours, in the old Coach which had been new when they
married and fresh lined on their eldest Son’s coming of age ten
years ago.—They had very pretty Property—enough, had their
family been of reasonable Limits to have allowed them a very
gentlemanlike share of Luxuries and Change—enough for them to
have indulged in a new Carriage and better roads, an occasional
month at Tunbridge Wells, and symptoms of the Gout and a
Winter at Bath;—but the maintenance, Education and fitting out
of fourteen Children demanded a very quiet, settled, careful
course of Life—and obliged them to be stationary and healthy at
Willingden. What Prudence had at first enjoined, was now
rendered pleasant by Habit. They never left home, and they had a
gratification in saying so.—But very far from wishing their
Children to do the same, they were glad to promote their getting
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
17
out into the World, as much as possible. They staid at home, that
their Children might get out;—and while making that home
extremely comfortable, welcomed every change from it which
could give useful connections or respectable acquaintance to Sons
or Daughters. When Mr. and Mrs. Parker therefore ceased from
soliciting a family-visit, and bounded their views to carrying back
one Daughter with them, no difficulties were started. It was
general pleasure and consent.—Their invitation was to Miss
Charlotte Heywood, a very pleasing young woman of two and
twenty, the eldest of the Daughters at home, and the one, who
under her Mother’s directions had been particularly useful and
obliging to them; who had attended them most, and knew them
best.—Charlotte was to go,—with excellent health, to bathe and be
better if she could—to receive every possible pleasure which
Sanditon could be made to supply by the gratitude of those she
went with—and to buy new Parasols, new Gloves, and new
Broches, for her sisters and herself at the Library, which Mr. P.
was anxiously wishing to support.—All that Mr. Heywood himself
could be persuaded to promise was, that he would send everyone
to Sanditon, who asked his advice, and that nothing should ever
induce him (as far as the future could be answered for) to spend
even five shillings at Brinshore.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
18
CHAPTER III
very neighbourhood should have a great Lady.—The great
Lady of Sanditon, was Lady Denham; and in their
Journey from Willingden to the Coast, Mr. Parker gave
Charlotte a more detailed account of her, than had been called for
before.—She had been necessarily often mentioned at
Willingden,—for being his Colleague in Speculation, Sanditon
itself could not be talked of long, without the introduction of Lady
Denham and that she was a very rich old Lady, who had buried
two Husbands, who knew the value of Money, was very much
looked up to and had a poor Cousin living with her, were facts
already well known, but some further particulars of her history
and her Character served to lighten the tediousness of a long Hill,
or a heavy bit of road, and to give the visiting Young Lady a
suitable Knowledge of the Person with whom she might now
expect to be daily associating.—Lady D. had been a rich Miss
Brereton, born to Wealth but not to Education. Her first Husband
had been a Mr. Hollis, a man of considerable Property in the
Country, of which a large share of the Parish of Sanditon, with
Manor and Mansion House made a part. He had been an elderly
Man when she married him;—her own age about thirty.—Her
motives for such a Match could be little understood at the distance
of forty years, but she had so well nursed and pleased Mr. Hollis,
that at his death he left her everything—all his Estates, and all at
her Disposal. After a widowhood of some years, she had been
induced to marry again. The late Sir Harry Denham, of Denham
E
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
19
Park in the Neighbourhood of Sanditon had succeeded in
removing her and her large Income to his own Domains, but he
could not succeed in the views of permanently enriching his
family, which were attributed to him. She had been too wary to
put anything out of her own Power—and when on Sir Harry’s
Decease she returned again to her own House at Sanditon, she
was said to have made this boast to a friend ‘that though she had
got nothing but her Title from the Family, still she had given
nothing for it.’—For the Title, it was to be supposed that she had
married—and Mr. P. acknowledged there being just such a degree
of value for it apparent now, as to give her conduct that natural
explanation. ‘There is at times,’ said he—‘a little self-importance—
but it is not offensive;—and there are moments, there are points,
when her Love of Money is carried greatly too far. But she is a
goodnatured Woman, a very goodnatured Woman,—a very
obliging, friendly Neighbour; a chearful, independant, valuable
character, and her faults may be entirely imputed to her want of
Education. She has good natural Sense, but quite uncultivated.—
She has a fine active mind, as well as a fine healthy frame for a
Woman of seventy, and enters into the improvement of Sanditon
with a spirit truly admirable—though now and then, a Littleness
will appear. She cannot look forward quite as I would have her—
and takes alarm at a trifling present expence, without considering
what returns it will make her in a year or two. That is—we think
differently, we now and then, see things differently, Miss H.—
Those who tell their own Story you know must be listened to with
Caution.—When you see us in contact, you will judge for
yourself.’—Lady D. was indeed a great Lady beyond the common
wants of Society—for she had many Thousands a year to
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
20
bequeath, and three distinct sets of People to be courted by; her
own relations, who might very reasonably wish for her Original
Thirty Thousand Pounds among them, the legal Heirs of Mr.
Hollis, who must hope to be more endebted to her sense of Justice
than he had allowed them to be to his, and those Members of the
Denham Family, whom her second Husband had hoped to make a
good Bargain for.—By all of these, or by Branches of them, she
had no doubt been long, and still continued to be, well attacked;—
and of these divisions, Mr. P. did not hesitate to say that Mr.
Hollis’ Kindred were the least in favour and Sir Harry Denham’s
the most.—The former he believed, had done themselves
irremediable harm by expressions of very unwise and unjustifiable
resentment at the time of Mr. Hollis’s death;—the Latter, to the
advantage of being the remnant of a Connection which she
certainly valued, joined those of having been known to her from
their Childhood, and of being always at hand to preserve their
interest by reasonable attention. Sir Edward, the present Baronet,
nephew to Sir Harry, resided constantly at Denham Park; and Mr.
P. had little doubt, that he and his Sister Miss D. who lived with
him, would be principally remembered in her Will. He sincerely
hoped it.—Miss Denham had a very small provision—and her
Brother was a poor Man for his rank in Society. ‘He is a warm
friend to Sanditon’—said Mr. Parker—‘and his hand would be as
liberal as his heart, had he the Power.—He would be a noble
Coadjutor!—As it is, he does what he can—and is running up a
tasteful little Cottage Ornèe on a strip of Waste Ground Lady D.
has granted him, which I have no doubt we shall have many a
Candidate for, before the end even of this Season.’ Till within the
last twelvemonth, Mr. P. had considered Sir Edward as standing
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
21
without a rival, as having the fairest chance of succeeding to the
greater part of all that she had to give—but there was now another
person’s claims to be taken into the account, those of the young
female relation, whom Lady D. had been induced to receive into
her Family. After having always protested against any such
Addition, and long and often enjoyed the repeated defeats she had
given to every attempt of her relations to introduce this young
Lady, or that young Lady as a Companion at Sanditon House, she
had brought back with her from London last Michaelmas a Miss
Brereton, who bid fair by her Merits to vie in favour with Sir
Edward, and to secure for herself and her family that share of the
accumulated Property which they had certainly the best right to
inherit.—Mr. Parker spoke warmly of Clara Brereton, and the
interest of his story increased very much with the introduction of
such a Character. Charlotte listened with more than amusement
now;—it was solicitude and Enjoyment, as she heard her
described to be lovely, amiable, gentle, unassuming, conducting
herself uniformly with great good sense, and evidently gaining by
her innate worth, on the affections of her Patroness.—Beauty,
Sweetness, Poverty and Dependance, do not want the imagination
of a Man to operate upon. With due exceptions—Woman feels for
Woman very promptly and compassionately. He gave the
particulars which had led to Clara’s admission at Sanditon, as no
bad exemplification of that mixture of Character, that union of
Littleness with Kindness with Good Sense with even Liberality
which he saw in Lady D.—After having avoided London for many
years, principally on account of these very Cousins, who were
continually writing, inviting and tormenting her, and whom she
was determined to keep at a distance, she had been obliged to go
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
22
there last Michaelmas with the certainty of being detained at least
a fortnight.—She had gone to an Hotel—living by her own account
as prudently as possible, to defy the reputed expensiveness of such
a home, and at the end of three Days calling for her Bill, that she
might judge of her state.—Its amount was such as determined her
on staying not another hour in the House, and she was preparing
in all the anger and perturbation which a belief of very gross
imposition there, and an ignorance of where to go for better usage,
to leave the Hotel at all hazards, when the Cousins, the politic and
lucky Cousins, who seemed always to have a spy on her,
introduced themselves at this important moment, and learning her
situation, persuaded her to accept such a home for the rest of her
stay as their humbler house in a very inferior part of London,
could offer.—She went; was delighted with her welcome and the
hospitality and attention she received from every body—found her
good Cousins the B.s beyond her expectation worthy people—and
finally was impelled by a personal knowledge of their narrow
Income and pecuniary difficulties, to invite one of the girls of the
family to pass the Winter with her. The invitation was to one, for
six months—with the probability of another being then to take her
place;—but in selecting the one, Lady D. had shewn the good part
of her Character—for passing by the actual daughters of the
House, she had chosen Clara, a Niece, more helpless and more
pitiable of course than any—a dependant on Poverty—an
additional Burthen on an encumbered Circle—and one, who had
been so low in every worldly view, as with all her natural
endowments and powers, to have been preparing for a situation
little better than a Nursery Maid.—Clara had returned with her—
and by her good sense and merit had now, to all appearance
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
23
secured a very strong hold in Lady D.’s regard. The six months
had long been over—and not a syllable was breathed of any
change, or exchange.—She was a general favourite;—the influence
of her steady conduct and mild, gentle Temper was felt by
everybody. The prejudices which had met her at first in some
quarters, were all dissipated. She was felt to be worthy of Trust—
to be the very companion who would guide and soften Lady D.—
who would enlarge her mind and open her hand.—She was as
thoroughly amiable as she was lovely—and since having had the
advantage of their Sanditon Breezes, that Loveliness was
complete.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
24
CHAPTER IV
nd whose very snug-looking Place is this?’—said
Charlotte, as in a sheltered Dip within two miles of the
Sea, they passed close by a moderate-sized house, well
fenced and planted, and rich in the Garden, Orchard and
Meadows which are the best embellishments of such a Dwelling.
‘It seems to have as many comforts about it as Willingden.’—‘Ah’—
said Mr. P.—‘This is my old House—the house of my
Forefathers—the house where I and all my Brothers and Sisters
were born and bred—and where my own three eldest Children
were born—where Mrs. P. and I lived till within the last two
years—till our new House was finished.—I am glad you are
pleased with it.—It is an honest old Place—and Hillier keeps it in
very good order. I have given it up you know to the Man who
occupies the chief of my Land. He gets a better House by it—and I,
a rather better situation!—one other Hill brings us to Sanditon—
modern Sanditon—a beautiful Spot. Our Ancestors, you know
always built in a hole.—Here were we, pent down in this little
contracted Nook, without Air or View, only one mile and three
quarters from the noblest expanse of Ocean between the South
foreland and the Land’s end, and without the smallest advantage
from it. You will not think I have made a bad exchange, when we
reach Trafalgar House—which by the bye, I almost wish I had not
named Trafalgar—for Waterloo is more the thing now. However,
Waterloo is in reserve—and if we have encouragement enough
‘A
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
25
this year for a little Crescent to be ventured on—(as I trust we
shall) then, we shall be able to call it Waterloo Crescent—and the
name joined to the form of the Building, which always takes, will
give us the command of Lodgers. In a good Season we should have
more applications than we could attend to.’—‘It was always a very
comfortable House’—said Mrs. Parker—looking at it through the
back window with something like the fondness of regret.—‘And
such a nice Garden—such an excellent Garden.’ ‘Yes, my Love,
but that we may be said to carry with us.—It supplies us, as before,
with all the fruit and vegetables we want; and we have in fact all
the comfort of an excellent Kitchen Garden, without the constant
Eyesore of its formalities; or the yearly nuisance of its decaying
vegetation.—Who can endure a Cabbage Bed in October?’ ‘Oh!
dear—yes—We are quite as well off for Gardenstuff as ever we
were—for if it is forgot to be brought at any time, we can always
buy what we want at Sanditon-House.—The Gardiner there, is
glad enough to supply us. But it was a nice place for the Children
to run about in. So Shady in Summer!’ ‘My dear, we shall have
shade enough on the Hill and more than enough in the course of a
very few years;—The Growth of my Plantations is a general
astonishment. In the mean while we have the Canvas Awning,
which gives us the most complete comfort within doors—and you
can get a Parasol at Whitby’s for little Mary at any time, or a large
Bonnet at Jebb’s—and as for the Boys, I must say I would rather
them run about in the Sunshine than not. I am sure we agree my
dear, in wishing our Boys to be as hardy as possible.’—‘Yes
indeed, I am sure we do—and I will get Mary a little Parasol,
which will make her as proud as can be. How Grave she will walk
about with it, and fancy herself quite a little Woman.—Oh! I have
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
26
not the smallest doubt of our being a great deal better off where
we are now. If we any of us want to bathe, we have not a quarter of
a mile to go.—But you know, (still looking back) one loves to look
at an old friend, at a place where one has been happy.—The
Hilliers did not seem to feel the Storms last Winter at all.—I
remember seeing Mrs. Hillier after one of those dreadful Nights,
when we had been literally rocked in our bed, and she did not
seem at all aware of the Wind being anything more than common.’
‘Yes, yes—that’s likely enough. We have all the Grandeur of the
Storm, with less real danger, because the Wind meeting with
nothing to oppose or confine it around our House, simply rages
and passes on—while down in this Gutter—nothing is known of
the state of the Air, below the Tops of the Trees—and the
Inhabitants may be taken totally unawares, by one of those
dreadful Currents which do more mischief in a Valley, when they
do arise than an open Country ever experiences in the heaviest
Gale.—But my dear Love—as to Gardenstuff;—you were saying
that any accidental omission is supplied in a moment by Lady D.’s
Gardiner—but it occurs to me that we ought to go elsewhere upon
such occasions—and that old Stringer and his son have a higher
claim. I encouraged him to set up—and am afraid he does not do
very well—that is, there has not been time enough yet.—He will do
very well beyond a doubt—but at first it is Uphill work; and
therefore we must give him what Help we can—and when any
Vegetables or fruit happen to be wanted—and it will not be amiss
to have them often wanted, to have something or other forgotten
most days;—Just to have a nominal supply you know, that poor old
Andrew may not lose his daily Job—but in fact to buy the chief of
our consumption of the Stringers.’ ‘Very well my Love, that can be
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
27
easily done—and Cook will be satisfied—which will be a great
comfort, for she is always complaining of old Andrew now, and
says he never brings her what she wants.—There—now the old
House is quite left behind.—What is it, your Brother Sidney says
about it’s being a Hospital?’ ‘Oh! my dear Mary, merely a Joke of
his. He pretends to advise me to make a Hospital of it. He pretends
to laugh at my Improvements. Sidney says any thing you know. He
has always said what he chose of and to us, all. Most Families have
such a member among them I believe Miss Heywood.—There is a
someone in most families privileged by superior abilities or spirits
to say anything.—In ours, it is Sidney; who is a very clever Young
Man,—and with great powers of pleasing.—He lives too much in
the World to be settled; that is his only fault.—He is here and there
and every where. I wish we may get him to Sanditon. I should like
to have you acquainted with him.—And it would be a fine thing for
the Place!—Such a young Man as Sidney, with his neat equipage
and fashionable air,—You and I Mary, know what effect it might
have: Many a respectable Family, many a careful Mother, many a
pretty Daughter, might it secure us, to the prejudice of E. Bourne
and Hastings.’—They were now approaching the Church and real
village of Sanditon, which stood at the foot of the Hill they were
afterwards to ascend—a Hill, whose side was covered with the
Woods and enclosures of Sanditon House and whose Height
ended in an open Down where the new Buildings might soon be
looked for. A branch only, of the Valley, winding more obliquely
towards the Sea, gave a passage to an inconsiderable Stream, and
formed at its mouth, a third Habitable Division, in a small cluster
of Fisherman’s Houses.—The Village contained little more than
Cottages, but the Spirit of the day had been caught, as Mr. P.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
28
observed with delight to Charlotte, and two or three of the best of
them were smartened up with a white Curtain and ‘Lodgings to
let’, and farther on, in the little Green Court of an old Farm House,
two Females in elegant white were actually to be seen with their
books and camp stools—and in turning the corner of the Baker’s
shop, the sound of a Harp might be heard through the upper
Casement.—Such sights and sounds were highly Blissful to Mr.
P.—Not that he had any personal concern in the success of the
Village itself; for considering it as too remote from the Beach, he
had done nothing there—but it was a most valuable proof of the
increasing fashion of the place altogether. If the Village could
attract, the Hill might be nearly full.—He anticipated an amazing
Season.—At the same time last year, (late in July) there had not
been a single Lodger in the Village!—nor did he remember any
during the whole Summer, excepting one family of children who
came from London for sea air after the hooping Cough, and whose
Mother would not let them be nearer the shore for fear of their
tumbling in.—‘Civilization, Civilization indeed!’—cried Mr. P.,
delighted. ‘Look my dear Mary—Look at William Heeley’s
windows.—Blue Shoes, and nankin Boots!—Who would have
expected such a sight at a Shoemaker’s in old Sanditon!—This is
new within the Month. There was no blue Shoe when we passed
this way a month ago.—Glorious indeed!—Well, I think I have
done something in my Day.—Now, for our Hill, our health-
breathing Hill.—’ In ascending, they passed the Lodge-Gates of
Sanditon House, and saw the top of the House itself among its
Groves. It was the last Building of former Days in that line of the
Parish. A little higher up, the Modern began; and in crossing the
Down, a Prospect House, a Bellevue Cottage, and a Denham Place
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
29
were to be looked at by Charlotte with the calmness of amused
Curiosity, and by Mr. P. with the eager eye which hoped to see
scarcely any empty houses.—More Bills at the Window than he
had calculated on;—and a smaller shew of company on the Hill—
Fewer Carriages, fewer Walkers. He had fancied it just the time of
day for them to be all returning from their Airings to dinner—But
the Sands and the Terrace always attracted some, and the Tide
must be flowing—about half-Tide now.—He longed to be on the
Sands, the Cliffs, at his own House, and everywhere out of his
House at once. His Spirits rose with the very sight of the Sea and
he could almost feel his Ancle getting stronger already.—Trafalgar
House, on the most elevated spot on the Down was a light elegant
Building, standing in a small Lawn with a very young plantation
round it, about an hundred yards from the brow of a steep, but not
very lofty Cliff—and the nearest to it, of every Building, excepting
one short row of smart-looking Houses, called the Terrace, with a
broad walk in front, aspiring to be the Mall of the Place. In this
row were the best Milliner’s shop and the Library—a little
detached from it, the Hotel and Billiard Room—Here began the
Descent to the Beach, and to the Bathing Machines—and this was
therefore the favourite spot for Beauty and Fashion. At Trafalgar
House, rising at a little distance behind the Terrace, the Travellers
were safely set down, and all was happiness and Joy between Papa
and Mama and their Children; while Charlotte having received
possession of her apartment, found amusement enough in
standing at her ample Venetian window, and looking over the
miscellaneous foreground of unfinished Buildings, waving Linen,
and tops of Houses, to the Sea, dancing and sparkling in Sunshine
and Freshness.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
30
CHAPTER V
hen they met before dinner, Mr. P. was looking over
Letters.—‘Not a Line from Sidney!’—said he.—‘He is an
idle fellow.—I sent him an account of my accident from
Willingden, and thought he would have vouchsafed me an
Answer.—But perhaps it implies that he is coming himself.—I
trust it may.—But here is a Letter from one of my Sisters. They
never fail me.—Women are the only Correspondents to be
depended on.—Now Mary, (smiling at his Wife)—before I open it,
what shall we guess as to the state of health of those it comes
from—or rather what would Sidney say if he were here?—Sidney
is a saucy fellow, Miss H.—And you must know, he will have it
there is a good deal of Imagination in my two Sisters’ complaints—
but it really is not so—or very little—They have wretched health,
as you have heard us say frequently, and are subject to a variety of
very serious Disorders.—Indeed, I do not believe they know what
a day’s health is;—and at the same time, they are such excellent
useful Women and have so much energy of Character that, where
any Good is to be done, they force themselves on exertions which
to those who do not thoroughly know them, have an extraordinary
appearance.—But there is really no affectation about them. They
have only weaker constitutions and stronger minds than are often
met with, either separate or together.—And our Youngest
Brother—who lives with them, and who is not much above twenty,
I am sorry to say, is almost as great an Invalid as themselves.—He
is so delicate that he can engage in no Profession.—Sidney laughs
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
31
at him—but it really is no Joke—though Sidney often makes me
laugh at them all inspite of myself.—Now, if he were here, I know
he would be offering odds, that either Susan Diana or Arthur
would appear by this letter to have been at the point of death
within the last month.’—Having run his eye over the Letter, he
shook his head and began: ‘No chance of seeing them at Sanditon
I am sorry to say.—A very indifferent account of them indeed.
Seriously, a very indifferent account.—Mary, you will be quite
sorry to hear how ill they have been and are.—Miss H., if you will
give me leave, I will read Diana’s Letter aloud.—I like to have my
friends acquainted with each other—and I am afraid this is the
only sort of acquaintance I shall have the means of accomplishing
between you.—And I can have no scruple on Diana’s account—for
her Letters shew her exactly as she is, the most active, friendly,
warmhearted Being in existence, and therefore must give a good
impression.’ He read.—‘My dear Tom, We were all much grieved
at your accident, and if you had not described yourself as fallen
into such very good hands, I should have been with you at all
hazards the day after the receipt of your Letter, though it found
me suffering under a more severe attack than usual of my old
grievance, Spasmodic Bile and hardly able to crawl from my Bed
to the Sofa.—But how were you treated?—Send me more
Particulars in your next.—If indeed a simple Sprain, as you
denominate it, nothing would have been so judicious as Friction,
Friction by the hand alone, supposing it could be applied
instantly.—Two years ago I happened to be calling on Mrs.
Sheldon when her Coachman sprained his foot as he was cleaning
the Carriage and could hardly limp into the House—but by the
immediate use of Friction alone steadily persevered in, (and I
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
32
rubbed his Ancle with my own hand for six Hours without
Intermission)—he was well in three days.—Many Thanks my dear
Tom, for the kindness with respect to us, which had so large a
share in bringing on your accident—But pray never run into Peril
again, in looking for an Apothecary on our account, for had you
the most experienced Man in his Line settled at Sanditon, it would
be no recommendation to us. We have entirely done with the
whole Medical Tribe. We have consulted Physician after Physician
in vain, till we are quite convinced that they can do nothing for us
and that we must trust to our own knowledge of our own wretched
Constitutions for any relief.—But if you think it advisable for the
interest of the Place, to get a Medical Man there, I will undertake
the commission with pleasure, and have no doubt of succeeding.—
I could soon put the necessary Irons in the fire.—As for getting to
Sanditon myself it is quite an Impossibility. I grieve to say that I
dare not attempt it, but my feelings tell me too plainly that in my
present state, the Sea air would probably be the death of me.—
And neither of my dear Companions will leave me, or I would
promote their going down to you for a fortnight. But in truth, I
doubt whether Susan’s nerves would be equal to the effort. She
has been suffering much from the Headache and Six Leaches a
day for ten days together relieved her so little that we thought it
right to change our measures—and being convinced on
examination that much of the Evil lay in her Gum, I persuaded her
to attack the disorder there. She has accordingly had three Teeth
drawn, and is decidedly better, but her Nerves are a good deal
deranged. She can only speak in a whisper—and fainted away
twice this morning on poor Arthur’s trying to suppress a cough.
He, I am happy to say is tolerably well—tho’ more languid than I
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
33
like—and I fear for his Liver.—I have heard nothing of Sidney
since your being together in Town, but conclude his scheme to the
I. of Wight has not taken place, or we should have seen him in his
way.—Most sincerely do we wish you a good Season at Sanditon,
and though we cannot contribute to your Beau Monde in person,
we are doing our utmost to send you Company worth having; and
think we may safely reckon on securing you two large Families,
one a rich West Indian from Surry, the other, a most respectable
Girls Boarding School, or Academy, from Camberwell.—I will not
tell you how many People I have employed in the business—Wheel
within wheel.—But Success more than repays.—Yours most
affectionately, &c.’—‘Well’—said Mr. P.—as he finished. ‘Though I
dare say Sidney might find something extremely entertaining in
this Letter and make us laugh for half an hour together I declare I
by myself, can see nothing in it but what is either very pitiable or
very creditable.—With all their sufferings, you perceive how much
they are occupied in promoting the Good of others!—So anxious
for Sanditon! Two large Families—One, for Prospect House
probably, the other, for No. 2. Denham Place—or the end house of
the Terrace,—and extra Beds at the Hotel.—I told you my Sisters
were excellent Women, Miss H.’ ‘And I am sure they must be very
extraordinary ones.’—said Charlotte. ‘I am astonished at the
chearful style of the Letter, considering the state in which both
Sisters appear to be.—Three Teeth drawn at once!—frightful!—
Your Sister Diana seems almost as ill as possible, but those three
Teeth of your Sister Susan’s, are more distressing than all the
rest.’ ‘Oh!—they are so used to the operation—to every
operation—and have such Fortitude!’ ‘Your Sisters know what
they are about, I dare say, but their Measures seem to touch on
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
34
Extremes.—I feel that in any illness, I should be so anxious for
Professional advice, so very little venturesome for myself, or any
body I loved!—But then, we have been so healthy a family, that I
can be no Judge of what the habit of self-doctoring may do.’ ‘Why
to own the truth,’ said Mrs. P.—‘I do think the Miss Parkers carry
it too far sometimes—and so do you my Love, you know.—You
often think they would be better, if they would leave themselves
more alone—and especially Arthur. I know you think it a great
pity they should give him such a turn for being ill.’ ‘Well, well—my
dear Mary—I grant you, it is unfortunate for poor Arthur, that, at
his time of Life he should be encouraged to give way to
Indisposition. It is bad;—it is bad that he should be fancying
himself too sickly for any Profession—and sit down at one and
twenty, on the interest of his own little Fortune, without any idea
of attempting to improve it, or of engaging in any occupation that
may be of use to himself or others.—But let us talk of pleasanter
things.—These two large Families are just what we wanted—
But—here is something at hand, pleasanter still—Morgan, with his
“Dinner on Table.”’
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
35
CHAPTER VI
he Party were very soon moving after Dinner. Mr. P. could
not be satisfied without an early visit to the Library, and
the Library Subscription book, and Charlotte was glad to
see as much, and as quickly as possible, where all was new. They
were out in the very quietest part of a Watering-place Day, when
the important Business of Dinner or of sitting after Dinner was
going on in almost every inhabited Lodging;—here and there a
solitary Elderly Man might be seen, who was forced to move early
and walk for health—but in general, it was a thorough pause of
Company, it was Emptiness and Tranquillity on the Terrace, the
Cliffs, and the Sands.—The Shops were deserted—the Straw Hats
and pendant Lace seemed left to their fate both within the House
and without, and Mrs. Whitby at the Library was sitting in her
inner room, reading one of her own Novels, for want of
Employment. The List of Subscribers was but commonplace. The
Lady Denham, Miss Brereton, Mr. and Mrs. P.—Sir Edward
Denham and Miss Denham, whose names might be said to lead off
the Season, were followed by nothing better than—Mrs.
Mathews—Miss Mathews, Miss E. Mathews, Miss H. Mathews.—
Dr. and Mrs. Brown—Mr. Richard Pratt.—Lieut. Smith R.N. Capt.
Little,—Limehouse.—Mrs. Jane Fisher, Miss Fisher, Miss
Scroggs.—Rev. Mr. Hanking. Mr. Beard—Solicitor, Grays Inn.—
Mrs. Davis, and Miss Merryweather.—Mr. P. could not but feel
that the List was not only without Distinction, but less numerous
than he had hoped. It was but July however, and August and
T
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
36
September were the Months;—And besides, the promised large
Families from Surry and Camberwell, were an ever-ready
consolation.—Mrs. Whitby came forward without delay from her
Literary recess, delighted to see Mr. Parker again, whose manners
recommended him to every body, and they were fully occupied in
their various Civilities and Communications, while Charlotte
having added her name to the List as the first offering to the
success of the Season, was busy in some immediate purchases for
the further good of Every body, as soon as Miss Whitby could be
hurried down from her Toilette, with all her glossy Curls and
smart Trinkets to wait on her.—The Library of course, afforded
every thing; all the useless things in the World that could not be
done without, and among so many pretty Temptations, and with
so much good will for Mr. P. to encourage Expenditure, Charlotte
began to feel that she must check herself—or rather she reflected
that at two and Twenty there could be no excuse for her doing
otherwise—and that it would not do for her to be spending all her
Money the very first Evening. She took up a Book; it happened to
be a volume of Camilla. She had not Camilla’s Youth, and had no
intention of having her Distress,—so, she turned from the Drawers
of rings and Broches repressed farther solicitation and paid for
what she bought.—For her particular gratification, they were then
to take a Turn on the Cliff—but as they quitted the Library they
were met by two Ladies whose arrival made an alteration
necessary, Lady Denham and Miss Brereton.—They had been to
Trafalgar House, and been directed thence to the Library, and
though Lady D. was a great deal too active to regard the walk of a
mile as any thing requiring rest, and talked of going home again
directly, the Parkers knew that to be pressed into their House, and
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
37
obliged to take her Tea with them, would suit her best,—and
therefore the stroll on the Cliff gave way to an immediate return
home.—‘No, no,’ said her Ladyship—‘I will not have you hurry
your Tea on my account.—I know you like your Tea late.—My
early hours are not to put my Neighbours to inconvenience. No,
no, Miss Clara and I will get back to our own Tea. We came out
with no other Thought.—We wanted just to see you and make sure
of your being really come, but we get back to our own Tea.’—She
went on however towards Trafalgar House and took possession of
the Drawing room very quietly—without seeming to hear a word
of Mrs. P.’s orders to the Servant as they entered, to bring Tea
directly. Charlotte was fully consoled for the loss of her walk, by
finding herself in company with those, whom the conversation of
the morning had given her a great curiosity to see. She observed
them well.—Lady D. was of middle height, stout, upright and alert
in her motions, with a shrewd eye, and self-satisfied air—but not
an unagreable Countenance—and tho’ her manner was rather
downright and abrupt as of a person who valued herself on being
free-spoken, there was a good humour and cordiality about her—a
civility and readiness to be acquainted with Charlotte herself, and
a heartiness of welcome towards her old friends, which was
inspiring the Good will, she seemed to feel. And as for Miss
Brereton, her appearance so completely justified Mr. P.’s praise
that Charlotte thought she had never beheld a more lovely, or
more Interesting young Woman.—Elegantly tall, regularly
handsome, with great delicacy of complexion and soft Blue eyes, a
sweetly modest and yet naturally graceful Address, Charlotte
could see in her only the most perfect representation of whatever
Heroine might be most beautiful and bewitching, in all the
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
38
numerous volumes they had left behind them on Mrs. Whitby’s
shelves.—Perhaps it might be partly oweing to her having just
issued from a Circulating Library—but she could not separate the
idea of a complete Heroine from Clara Brereton. Her situation
with Lady Denham so very much in favour of it!—She seemed
placed with her on purpose to be ill-used. Such Poverty and
Dependance joined to such Beauty and Merit, seemed to leave no
choice in the business.—These feelings were not the result of any
spirit of Romance in Charlotte herself. No, she was a very sober-
minded young Lady, sufficiently well-read in Novels to supply her
Imagination with amusement, but not at all unreasonably
influenced by them; and while she pleased herself the first five
minutes with fancying the Persecutions which ought to be the Lot
of the interesting Clara, especially in the form of the most
barbarous conduct on Lady Denham’s side, she found no
reluctance to admit from subsequent observation, that they
appeared to be on very comfortable Terms.—She could see
nothing worse in Lady Denham, than the sort of oldfashioned
formality of always calling her Miss Clara—nor anything
objectionable in the degree of observance and attention which
Clara paid.—On one side it seemed protecting kindness, on the
other grateful and affectionate respect.—The Conversation turned
entirely upon Sanditon, its present number of Visitants and the
Chances of a good Season. It was evident that Lady D. had more
anxiety, more fears of loss, than her Coadjutor. She wanted to
have the Place fill faster, and seemed to have many harassing
apprehensions of the Lodgings being in some instances
underlet.—Miss Diana Parker’s two large Families were not
forgotten. ‘Very good, very good,’ said her Ladyship.—‘A West
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
39
Indy Family and a school. That sounds well. That will bring
Money.’—‘No people spend more freely, I believe, than W.
Indians,’ observed Mr. Parker. ‘Aye—so I have heard—and
because they have full Purses, fancy themselves equal, may be, to
your old Country Families. But then, they who scatter their Money
so freely, never think of whether they may not be doing mischief
by raising the price of Things—And I have heard that’s very much
the case with your West-injines—and if they come among us to
raise the price of our necessaries of Life, we shall not much thank
them Mr. Parker.’—‘My dear Madam, They can only raise the
price of consumeable Articles, by such an extraordinary Demand
for them and such a diffusion of Money among us, as must do us
more Good than harm.—Our Butchers and Bakers and Traders in
general cannot get rich without bringing Prosperity to us.—If they
do not gain, our rents must be insecure—and in proportion to
their profit must be ours eventually in the increased value of our
Houses.’ ‘Oh!—well.—But I should not like to have Butcher’s meat
raised, though—and I shall keep it down as long as I can.—Aye—
that young Lady smiles I see;—I dare say she thinks me an odd
sort of a Creature,—but she will come to care about such matters
herself in time. Yes, Yes, my Dear, depend upon it, you will be
thinking of the price of Butcher’s meat in time—though you may
not happen to have quite such a Servants Hall full to feed, as I
have.—And I do believe those are best off, that have fewest
Servants.—I am not a Woman of Parade, as all the World knows,
and if it was not for what I owe to poor Mr. Hollis’s memory, I
should never keep up Sanditon House is I do;—it is not for my
own pleasure.—Well Mr. Parker—and the other is a Boarding
school, a French Boarding School, is it?—No harm in that.—
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
40
They’ll stay their six weeks.—And out of such a number, who
knows but some may be consumptive and want Asses milk—and I
have two Milch asses at this present time.—But perhaps the little
Misses may hurt the Furniture.—I hope they will have a good
sharp Governess to look after them.’ Poor Mr. Parker got no more
credit from Lady D. than he had from his Sisters, for the Object
which had taken him to Willingden. ‘Lord! my dear Sir,’ she cried,
‘how could you think of such a thing? I am very sorry you met with
your accident, but upon my word you deserved it.—Going after a
Doctor!—Why, what should we do with a Doctor here? It would be
only encouraging our Servants and the Poor to fancy themselves
ill, if there was a Doctor at hand.—Oh! pray, let us have none of
the Tribe at Sanditon. We go on very well as we are. There is the
Sea and the Downs and my Milch-Asses—and I have told Mrs.
Whitby that if any body enquires for a Chamber-Horse, they may
be supplied at a fair rate—(poor Mr. Hollis’s Chamber-Horse, as
good as new)—and what can People want for more?—Here have I
lived seventy good years in the world and never took Physic above
twice—and never saw the face of a Doctor in all my Life, on my
own account.—And I verily believe if my poor dear Sir Harry had
never seen one neither, he would have been alive now.—Ten fees,
one after another, did the Man take who sent him out of the
World.—I beseech you Mr. Parker, no Doctors here.’—The Tea
things were brought in.—‘Oh! my dear Mrs. Parker—you should
not indeed—why would you do so? I was just upon the point of
wishing you good Evening. But since you are so very neighbourly,
I believe Miss Clara and I must stay.’
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
41
CHAPTER VII
he popularity of the Parkers brought them some visitors
the very next morning;—amongst them, Sir Edward
Denham and his Sister, who having been at Sanditon H—
drove on to pay their Compliments; and the duty of Letter-writing
being accomplished, Charlotte was settled with Mrs. P. in the
Drawing room in time to see them all.—The Denhams were the
only ones to excite particular attention. Charlotte was glad to
complete her knowledge of the family by an introduction to them,
and found them, the better half at least—(for while single, the
Gentleman may sometimes be thought the better half, of the
pair)—not unworthy notice.—Miss D. was a fine young woman,
but cold and reserved, giving the idea of one who felt her
consequence with Pride and her Poverty with Discontent, and
who was immediately gnawed by the want of an handsomer
Equipage than the simple Gig in which they travelled, and which
their Groom was leading about still in her sight.—Sir Edward was
much her superior in air and manner;—certainly handsome, but
yet more to be remarked for his very good address and wish of
paying attention and giving pleasure.—He came into the room
remarkably well, talked much—and very much to Charlotte, by
whom he chanced to be placed—and she soon perceived that he
had a fine Countenance, a most pleasing gentleness of voice, and a
great deal of Conversation. She liked him.—Sober-minded as she
was, she thought him agreable, and did not quarrel with the
suspicion of his finding her equally so, which would arise from his
T
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
42
evidently disregarding his Sister’s motion to go, and persisting in
his station and his discourse.—I make no apologies for my
Heroine’s vanity.—If there are young Ladies in the World at her
time of Life, more dull of Fancy and more careless of pleasing, I
know them not, and never wish to know them.—At last, from the
low French windows of the Drawing room which commanded the
road and all the Paths across the Down, Charlotte and Sir Edward
as they sat, could not but observe Lady D. and Miss B. walking
by—and there was instantly a slight change in Sir Edward’s
countenance—with an anxious glance after them as they
proceeded—followed by an early proposal to his Sister—not
merely for moving, but for walking on together to the Terrace—
which altogether gave an hasty turn to Charlotte’s fancy, cured
her of her halfhour’s fever, and placed her in a more capable state
of judging, when Sir Edward was gone, of how agreable he had
actually been.—‘Perhaps there was a good deal in his Air and
Address; And his Title did him no harm.’ She was very soon in his
company again. The first object of the Parkers, when their House
was cleared of morning visitors was to get out themselves;—the
Terrace was the attraction to all;—Every body who walked, must
begin with the Terrace, and there, seated on one of the two Green
Benches by the Gravel walk, they found the united Denham
Party;—but though united in the Gross, very distinctly divided
again—the two superior Ladies being at one end of the bench, and
Sir Edward and Miss B. at the other.—Charlotte’s first glance told
her that Sir Edward’s air was that of a Lover.—There could be no
doubt of his Devotion to Clara.—How Clara received it, was less
obvious—but she was inclined to think not very favourably; for
tho’ sitting thus apart with him (which probably she might not
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
43
have been able to prevent) her air was calm and grave.—That the
young Lady at the other end of the Bench was doing Penance, was
indubitable. The difference in Miss Denham’s countenance, the
change from Miss Denham sitting in cold Grandeur in Mrs.
Parker’s Drawing-room to be kept from silence by the efforts of
others, to Miss D. at Lady D.’s Elbow, listening and talking with
smiling attention or solicitous eagerness, was very striking—and
very amusing—or very melancholy, just as Satire or Morality
might prevail. Miss Denham’s Character was pretty well decided
with Charlotte. Sir Edward’s required longer Observation. He
surprised her by quitting Clara immediately on their all joining
and agreeing to walk, and by addressing his attentions entirely to
herself.—Stationing himself close by her, he seemed to mean to
detach her as much as possible from the rest of the Party and to
give her the whole of his Conversation. He began, in a tone of
great Taste and Feeling, to talk of the Sea and the Sea shore—and
ran with Energy through all the usual Phrases employed in praise
of their Sublimity, and descriptive of the undescribable Emotions
they excite in the Mind of Sensibility.—The terrific Grandeur of
the Ocean in a Storm, its glassy surface in a calm, its Gulls and its
Samphire, and the deep fathoms of its Abysses, its quick
vicissitudes, its direful Deceptions, its Mariners tempting it in
Sunshine and overwhelmed by the sudden Tempest, All were
eagerly and fluently touched;—rather commonplace perhaps—but
doing very well from the Lips of a handsome Sir Edward,—and
she could not but think him a Man of Feeling—till he began to
stagger her by the number of his Quotations, and the
bewilderment of some of his sentences.—‘Do you remember,’ said
he, ‘Scotts’ beautiful Lines on the Sea?—Oh! what a description
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
44
they convey!—They are never out of my Thoughts when I walk
here.—That Man who can read them unmoved must have the
nerves of an Assassin!—Heaven defend me from meeting such a
Man un-armed.’—‘What description do you mean?’—said
Charlotte. ‘I remember none at this moment, of the Sea, in either
of Scotts’ Poems.’—‘Do not you indeed?—Nor can I exactly recall
the beginning at this moment—But—you cannot have forgotten
his description of Woman.—
“Oh! Woman in our Hours of Ease —”
Delicious! Delicious!—Had he written nothing more, he would
have been Immortal. And then again, that unequalled, unrivalled
address to Parental affection—
“Some feelings are to Mortals given
With less of Earth in them than Heaven” &c
But while we are on the subject of Poetry, what think you Miss H.
of Burns’s Lines to his Mary?—Oh! there is Pathos to madden
one!—If ever there was a Man who felt, it was Burns.—
Montgomery has all the Fire of Poetry, Wordsworth has the true
soul of it—Campbell in his pleasures of Hope has touched the
extreme of our Sensations—“Like Angel’s visits, few and far
between.” Can you conceive any thing more subduing, more
melting, more fraught with the deep Sublime than that Line?—
But Burns—I confess my sense of his Pre-eminence Miss H.—If
Scott has a fault, it is the want of Passion. Tender, Elegant,
Descriptive—but Tame.—The Man who cannot do justice to the
attributes of Woman is my contempt.—Sometimes indeed a flash
of feeling seems to irradiate him—as in the Lines we were
speaking of—“Oh! Woman in our hours of Ease”—. But Burns is
always on fire.—His Soul was the Altar in which lovely Woman sat
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
45
enshrined, his Spirit truly breathed the immortal Incence which is
her Due.—’ ‘I have read several of Burns’ Poems with great
delight,’ said Charlotte as soon as she had time to speak, ‘but I am
not poetic enough to separate a Man’s Poetry entirely from his
Character;—and poor Burns’s known Irregularities, greatly
interrupt my enjoyment of his Lines.—I have difficulty in
depending on the Truth of his Feelings as a Lover. I have not faith
in the sincerity of the affections of a Man of his Description. He felt
and he wrote and he forgot.’ ‘Oh! no no’—exclaimed Sir Edward in
an extasy. ‘He was all ardour and Truth!—His Genius and his
Susceptibilities might lead him into some Aberrations—But who is
perfect?—It were Hyper-criticism, it were Pseudo-philosophy to
expect from the soul of high toned Genius, the grovellings of a
common mind.—The Coruscations of Talent, elicited by
impassioned feeling in the breast of Man, are perhaps
incompatible with some of the prosaic Decencies of Life;—nor can
you, loveliest Miss Heywood (speaking with an air of deep
sentiment)—nor can any Woman be a fair Judge of what a Man
may be propelled to say, write or do, by the sovereign impulses of
illimitable Ardour.’ This was very fine;—but if Charlotte
understood it at all, not very moral—and being moreover by no
means pleased with his extraordinary stile of compliment, she
gravely answered ‘I really know nothing of the matter.—This is a
charming day. The Wind I fancy must be Southerly.’ ‘Happy,
happy Wind, to engage Miss Heywood’s Thoughts!’ She began to
think him downright silly.—His chusing to walk with her, she had
learnt to understand. It was done to pique Miss Brereton. She had
read it, in an anxious glance or two on his side—but why he should
talk so much Nonsense, unless he could do no better, was un-
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
46
intelligible.—He seemed very sentimental, very full of some
Feelings or other, and very much addicted to all the newest-
fashioned hard words—had not a very clear Brain she presumed,
and talked a good deal by rote.—The Future might explain him
further—but when there was a proposition for going into the
Library she felt that she had had quite enough of Sir Edward for
one morning, and very gladly accepted Lady D.’s invitation of
remaining on the Terrace with her.—The others all left them, Sir
Edward with looks of very gallant despair in tearing himself away,
and they united their agreableness—that is, Lady Denham like a
true great Lady, talked and talked only of her own concerns, and
Charlotte listened—amused in considering the contrast between
her two companions.—Certainly, there was no strain of doubtful
Sentiment, nor any phrase of difficult interpretation in Lady D’s
discourse. Taking hold of Charlotte’s arm with the ease of one who
felt that any notice from her was an Honour, and communicative,
from the influence of the same conscious Importance or a natural
love of talking, she immediately said in a tone of great
satisfaction—and with a look of arch sagacity—‘Miss Esther wants
me to invite her and her Brother to spend a week with me at
Sanditon House, as I did last Summer—but I shan’t.—She has
been trying to get round me every way, with her praise of this, and
her praise of that; but I saw what she was about.—I saw through it
all.—I am not very easily taken in my Dear.’ Charlotte could think
of nothing more harmless to be said, than the simple enquiry of—
‘Sir Edward and Miss Denham?’—‘Yes, my Dear. My young Folks,
as I call them sometimes, for I take them very much by the hand. I
had them with me last Summer about this time, for a week; from
Monday to Monday; and very delighted and thankful they were.—
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
47
For they are very good young People my Dear. I would not have
you think that I only notice them, for poor dear Sir Harry’s sake.
No, no; they are very deserving themselves, or trust me, they
would not be so much in my Company.—I am not the Woman to
help any body blindfold.—I always take care to know what I am
about and who I have to deal with, before I stir a finger.—I do not
think I was ever over-reached in my Life; and That is a good deal
for a Woman to say that has been married twice.—Poor dear Sir
Harry (between ourselves) thought at first to have got more.—But
(with a bit of a sigh) he is gone, and we must not find fault with the
Dead. Nobody could live happier together than us—and he was a
very honourable Man, quite the Gentleman of ancient Family.—
And when he died, I gave Sir Edward his Gold Watch.’ She said
this with a look at her Companion which implied its right to
produce a great Impression—and seeing no rapturous
astonishment in Charlotte’s countenance, added quickly—‘He did
not bequeath it to his Nephew, my dear—It was no bequest. It was
not in the Will. He only told me, and that but once, that he should
wish his Nephew to have his Watch; but it need not have been
binding, if I had not chose it.’ ‘Very kind indeed! very
Handsome;’—said Charlotte, absolutely forced to affect
admiration.—‘Yes, my dear—and it is not the only kind thing I
have done by him.—I have been a very liberal friend to Sir
Edward. And poor young Man, he needs it bad enough;—For
though I am only the Dowager my Dear, and he is the Heir, things
do not stand between us in the way they commonly do between
those two parties.—Not a shilling do I receive from the Denham
Estate. Sir Edward has no Payments to make me. He don’t stand
uppermost, believe me.—It is I that help him.’ ‘Indeed!—He is a
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
48
very fine young Man;—particularly Elegant in his Address.’—This
was said chiefly for the sake of saying something—but Charlotte
directly saw that it was laying her open to suspicion by Lady D.’s
giving a shrewd glance at her and replying—‘Yes, yes, he is very
well to look at—and it is to be hoped that some Lady of large
fortune will think so—for Sir Edward must marry for Money.—He
and I often talk that matter over.—A handsome young fellow like
him, will go smirking and smiling about and paying girls
compliments but he knows he must marry for Money.—And Sir
Edward is a very steady young Man in the main, and has got very
good notions.’ ‘Sir Edward Denham,’ said Charlotte, ‘with such
personal Advantages may be almost sure of getting a Woman of
fortune, if he chuses it.’—This glorious sentiment seemed quite to
remove suspicion. ‘Aye my Dear—That’s very sensibly said’ cried
Lady D—‘And if we could but get a young Heiress to S.! But
Heiresses are monstrous scarce! I do not think we have had an
Heiress here, or even a Co— since Sanditon has been a public
place. Families come after Families, but as far as I can learn, it is
not one in an hundred of them that have any real Property,
Landed or Funded.—An Income perhaps, but no Property.
Clergymen may be, or Lawyers from Town, or Half pay officers, or
Widows with only a jointure. And what good can such people do
anybody?—except just as they take our empty Houses—and
(between ourselves) I think they are great fools for not staying at
home. Now, if we could get a young Heiress to be sent here for her
health—(and if she was ordered to drink asses milk I could supply
her)—and as soon as she got well, have her fall in love with Sir
Edward!’—‘That would be very fortunate indeed.’ ‘And Miss
Esther must marry somebody of fortune too—She must get a rich
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
49
Husband. Ah! young Ladies that have no Money are very much to
be pitied!—But’—after a short pause—‘if Miss Esther thinks to
talk me into inviting them to come and stay at Sanditon House,
she will find herself mistaken.—Matters are altered with me since
last Summer you know. I have Miss Clara with me now, which
makes a great difference.’ She spoke this so seriously that
Charlotte instantly saw in it the evidence of real penetration and
prepared for some fuller remarks—but it was followed only by—‘I
have no fancy for having my House as full as an Hotel. I should not
chuse to have my two Housemaids Time taken up all the morning,
in dusting out Bed rooms.—They have Miss Clara’s room to put to
rights as well as my own every day.—If they had hard Places, they
would want Higher Wages. For objections of this Nature, Charlotte
was not prepared, and she found it so impossible even to affect
sympathy, that she could say nothing.—Lady D. soon added, with
great glee—‘And besides all this my Dear, am I to be filling my
House to the prejudice of Sanditon?—If People want to be by the
Sea, why dont they take Lodgings?—Here are a great many empty
Houses—three on this very Terrace; no fewer than three Lodging
Papers staring us in the face at this very moment, Numbers 3, 4
and 8. 8, the Corner House may be too large for them, but either of
the two others are nice little snug Houses, very fit for a young
Gentleman and his sister—And so, my dear, the next time Miss
Esther begins talking about the dampness of Denham Park, and
the Good Bathing always does her, I shall advise them to come and
take one of these Lodgings for a fortnight—Don’t you think that
will be very fair?—Charity begins at home you know.’—Charlotte’s
feelings were divided between amusement and indignation—but
indignation had the larger and the increasing share.—She kept
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
50
her Countenance and she kept a civil Silence. She could not carry
her forbearance farther; but without attempting to listen longer,
and only conscious that Lady D. was still talking on in the same
way, allowed her Thoughts to form themselves into such a
Meditation as this.—‘She is thoroughly mean. I had not expected
any thing so bad.—Mr. P. spoke too mildly of her.—His Judgement
is evidently not to be trusted.—His own Goodnature misleads him.
He is too kind hearted to see clearly. I must judge for myself.—
And their very connection prejudices him.—He has persuaded her
to engage in the same Speculation—and because their object in
that Line is the same, he fancies she feels like him in others.—But
she is very, very mean.—I can see no Good in her.—Poor Miss
Brereton!—And she makes every body mean about her.—This
poor Sir Edward and his Sister,—how far Nature meant them to
be respectable I cannot tell,—but they are obliged to be Mean in
their Servility to her.—And I am Mean too, in giving her my
attention, with the appearance of coinciding with her.—Thus it is,
when Rich People are Sordid.’
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
51
CHAPTER VIII
he two Ladies continued walking together till rejoined by
the others, who as they issued from the Library were
followed by a young Whitby running off with five volumes
under his arm to Sir Edward’s Gig—and Sir Edward approaching
Charlotte, said ‘You may perceive what has been our Occupation.
My Sister wanted my Counsel in the selection of some books.—We
have many leisure hours, and read a great deal.—I am no
indiscriminate Novel-Reader. The mere Trash of the common
Circulating Library, I hold in the highest contempt. You will never
hear me advocating those puerile Emanations which detail
nothing but discordant Principles incapable of Amalgamation, or
those vapid tissues of ordinary Occurrences from which no useful
Deductions can be drawn.—In vain may we put them into a
literary Alembic;—we distil nothing which can add to Science.—
You understand me I am sure?’ ‘I am not quite certain that I do.—
But if you will describe the sort of Novels which you do approve, I
dare say it will give me a clearer idea.’ ‘Most willingly, Fair
Questioner.—The Novels which I approve are such as display
Human Nature with Grandeur—such as shew her in the
Sublimities of intense Feeling—such as exhibit the progress of
strong Passion from the first Germ of incipient Susceptibility to
the utmost Energies of Reason half-dethroned,—where we see the
strong spark of Woman’s Captivations elicit such Fire in the Soul
of Man as leads him—(though at the risk of some Aberration from
the strict line of Primitive Obligations)—hazard all, dare all,
T
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
52
achieve all, to obtain her.—Such are the Works which I peruse
with delight, and I hope I may say, with Amelioration. They hold
forth the most splendid Portraitures of high Conceptions,
Unbounded Views, illimitable Ardour, indomptible Decision—and
even when the Event is mainly anti-prosperous to the high-toned
Machinations of the prime Character, the potent, pervading Hero
of the Story, it leaves us full of Generous Emotions for him;—our
Hearts are paralized. T’were Pseudo-Philosophy to assert that we
do not feel more enwraped by the brilliancy of his Career, than by
the tranquil and morbid Virtues of any opposing Character. Our
approbation of the Latter is but Eleemosynary.—These are the
Novels which enlarge the primitive Capabilities of the Heart, and
which it cannot impugn the Sense or be any Dereliction of the
character, of the most anti-puerile Man, to be Conversant with.’—
‘If I understand you aright’—said Charlotte—‘our taste in Novels
is not at all the same.’ And here they were obliged to part—Miss D.
being too much tired of them all, to stay any longer.—The truth
was that Sir Edward whom circumstances had confined very
much to one spot had read more sentimental Novels than agreed
with him. His fancy had been early caught by all the impassioned,
and most exceptionable parts of Richardson; and such Authors as
have since appeared to tread in Richardson’s steps, so far as Man’s
determined pursuit of Woman in defiance of every opposition of
feeling and convenience is concerned, had since occupied the
greater part of his literary hours, and formed his Character.—With
a perversity of Judgement, which must be attributed to his not
having by Nature a very strong head, the Graces, the Spirit, the
Sagacity, and the Perseverance, of the Villain of the Story
outweighed all his absurdities and all his Atrocities with Sir
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
53
Edward. With him, such Conduct was Genius, Fire and Feeling.—
It interested and inflamed him; and he was always more anxious
for its Success and mourned over its Discomfitures with more
Tenderness than could ever have been contemplated by the
Authors.—Though he owed many of his ideas to this sort of
reading, it were unjust to say that he read nothing else, or that his
Language were not formed on a more general Knowledge of
modern Literature.—He read all the Essays, Letters, Tours and
Criticisms of the day—and with the same ill-luck which made him
derive only false Principles from Lessons of Morality, and
incentives to Vice from the History of its Overthrow, he gathered
only hard words and involved sentences from the style of our most
approved Writers.
Sir Edward’s great object in life was to be seductive.—With
such personal advantages as he knew himself to possess, and such
Talents as he did also give himself credit for, he regarded it as his
Duty.—He felt that he was formed to be a dangerous Man—quite
in the line of the Lovelaces.—The very name of Sir Edward he
thought, carried some degree of fascination with it.—To be
generally gallant and assiduous about the fair, to make fine
speeches to every pretty Girl, was but the inferior part of the
Character he had to play.—Miss Heywood, or any other young
Woman with any pretensions to Beauty, he was entitled
(according to his own views of Society) to approach with high
Compliments and Rhapsody on the slightest acquaintance; but it
was Clara alone on whom he had serious designs; it was Clara
whom he meant to seduce.—Her seduction was quite determined
on. Her Situation in every way called for it. She was his rival in
Lady D.’s favour, she was young, lovely and dependant.—He had
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
54
very early seen the necessity of the case, and had now been long
trying with cautious assiduity to make an impression on her heart,
and to undermine her Principles.—Clara saw through him, and
had not the least intention of being seduced—but she bore with
him patiently enough to confirm the sort of attachment which her
personal Charms had raised.—A greater degree of discouragement
indeed would not have affected Sir Edward. He was armed against
the highest pitch of Disdain or Aversion.—If she could not be won
by affection, he must carry her off. He knew his Business.—
Already had he had many Musings on the Subject. If he were
constrained so to act, he must naturally wish to strike out
something new, to exceed those who had gone before him—and he
felt a strong curiosity to ascertain whether the Neighbourhood of
Tombuctoo might not afford some solitary House adapted for
Clara’s reception;—but the Expence alas! of Measures in that
masterly style was ill-suited to his Purse, and Prudence obliged
him to prefer the quietest sort of ruin and disgrace for the object of
his Affections, to the more renowned.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
55
CHAPTER IX
ne day, soon after Charlotte’s arrival at Sanditon, she had
the pleasure of seeing just as she ascended from the
Sands to the Terrace, a Gentleman’s Carriage with Post
Horses standing at the door of the Hotel, as very lately arrived,
and by the quantity of Luggage taking off, bringing, it might be
hoped, some respectable family determined on a long residence.—
Delighted to have such good news for Mr. and Mrs. P., who had
both gone home some time before, she proceeded for Trafalgar
House with as much alacrity as could remain, after having been
contending for the last two hours with a very fine wind blowing
directly on shore; but she had not reached the little Lawn, when
she saw a Lady walking nimbly behind her at no great distance;
and convinced that it could be no acquaintance of her own, she
resolved to hurry on and get into the House if possible before her.
But the Stranger’s pace did not allow this to be accomplished;—
Charlotte was on the steps and had rung, but the door was not
opened, when the other crossed the Lawn;—and when the Servant
appeared, they were just equally ready for entering the House.—
The ease of the Lady, her ‘How do you do Morgan?’ and Morgan’s
Looks on seeing her, were a moment’s astonishment—but another
moment brought Mr. P. into the Hall to welcome the Sister he had
seen from the Drawing room, and she was soon introduced to Miss
Diana Parker. There was a great deal of surprise but still more
pleasure in seeing her.—Nothing could be kinder than her
O
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
56
reception from both Husband and Wife. ‘How did she come? and
with whom?—And they were so glad to find her equal to the
Journey!—And that she was to belong to them, was a thing of
course.’ Miss Diana P. was about four and thirty, of middling
height and slender;—delicate looking rather than sickly; with an
agreable face, and a very animated eye;—her manners resembling
her Brother’s in their ease and frankness, though with more
decision and less mildness in her Tone. She began an account of
herself without delay.—Thanking them for their Invitation, but
‘that was quite out of the question, for they were all three come,
and meant to get into Lodgings and make some stay.’—‘All three
come!—What!—Susan and Arthur!—Susan able to come too!—
This was better and better.’ ‘Yes—we are actually all come. Quite
unavoidable—Nothing else to be done.—You shall hear all about
it.—But my dear Mary, send for the Children;—I long to see
them.’—‘And how has Susan born the Journey?—and how is
Arthur?—and why do not we see him here with you?’—‘Susan has
born it wonderfully. She had not a wink of sleep either the night
before we set out, or last night at Chichester, and as this is not so
common with her as with me, I have had a thousand fears for
her—but she had kept up wonderfully—had no Hysterics of
consequence till we came within sight of poor old Sanditon—and
the attack was not very violent—nearly over by the time we
reached your Hotel—so that we got her out of the Carriage
extremely well, with only Mr. Woodcock’s assistance—and when I
left her she was directing the Disposal of the Luggage, and helping
old Sam uncord the Trunks.—She desired her best Love, with a
thousand regrets at being so poor a Creature that she could not
come with me. And as for poor Arthur, he would not have been
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
57
unwilling himself, but there is so much Wind that I did not think
he could safely venture,—for I am sure there is Lumbago hanging
about him—and so I helped him on with his great Coat and sent
him off to the Terrace, to take us Lodgings.—Miss Heywood must
have seen our Carriage standing at the Hotel.—I knew Miss
Heywood the moment I saw her before me on the Down.—My dear
Tom I am so glad to see you walk so well. Let me feel your
Ancle.—That’s right; all right and clean. The play of your Sinews a
very little affected:—barely perceptible.—Well—now for the
explanation of my being here.—I told you in my Letter, of the two
considerable Families, I was hoping to secure for you—the West
Indians, and the Seminary.’ Here Mr. P. drew his Chair still nearer
to his Sister, and took her hand again most affectionately as he
answered ‘Yes, Yes;—How active and how kind you have been!’—
‘The West-indians,’ she continued, ‘whom I look upon as the most
desirable of the two—as the Best of the Good—prove to be a Mrs.
Griffiths and her family. I know them only through others.—You
must have heard me mention Miss Capper, the particular friend of
my very particular friend Fanny Noyce;—now, Miss Capper is
extremely intimate with a Mrs. Darling, who is on terms of
constant correspondence with Mrs. Griffiths herself.—Only a short
chain, you see, between us, and not a Link wanting. Mrs. G. meant
to go to the Sea, for her Young People’s benefit—had fixed on the
coast of Sussex, but was undecided as to the where, wanted
something Private, and wrote to ask the opinion of her friend Mrs.
Darling.—Miss Capper happened to be staying with Mrs. D. when
Mrs. G.’s Letter arrived, and was consulted on the question; she
wrote the same day to Fanny Noyce and mentioned it to her—and
Fanny all alive for us, instantly took up her pen and forwarded the
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
58
circumstance to me—except as to Names—which have but lately
transpired.—There was but one thing for me to do.—I answered
Fanny’s Letter by the same Post and pressed for the
recommendation of Sanditon. Fanny had feared your having no
house large enough to receive such a Family.—But I seem to be
spinning out my story to an endless length.—You see how it was
all managed. I had the pleasure of hearing soon afterwards by the
same simple link of connection that Sanditon had been
recommended by Mrs. Darling, and that the West-indians were
very much disposed to go thither.—This was the state of the case
when I wrote to you;—but two days ago;—yes, the day before
yesterday—I heard again from Fanny Noyce, saying that she had
heard from Miss Capper, who by a Letter from Mrs. Darling
understood that Mrs. G. has expressed herself in a letter to Mrs. D.
more doubtingly on the subject of Sanditon.—Am I clear? I would
be anything rather than not clear.’—‘Oh! perfectly, perfectly.
Well?’—‘The reason of this hesitation, was her having no
connections in the place, and no means of ascertaining that she
should have good accomodations on arriving there;—and she was
particularly careful and scrupulous on all those matters more on
account of a certain Miss Lambe a young Lady (probably a Niece)
under her care, than on her own account or her Daughters.—Miss
Lambe has an immense fortune—richer than all the rest—and
very delicate health.—One sees clearly enough by all this, the sort
of Woman Mrs. G. must be—as helpless and indolent, as Wealth
and a Hot Climate are apt to make us. But we are not all born to
equal energy.—What was to be done?—I had a few moments
indecision;—Whether to offer to write to you,—or to Mrs. Whitby
to secure them a House?—but neither pleased me.—I hate to
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
59
employ others, when I am equal to act myself—and my conscience
told me that this was an occasion which called for me. Here was a
family of helpless Invalides whom I might essentially serve.—I
sounded Susan—the same Thought had occurred to her.—Arthur
made no difficulties—our plan was arranged immediately, we
were off yesterday morning at six, left Chichester at the same hour
today—and here we are.—‘Excellent! Excellent!’ cried Mr.
Parker.—‘Diana, you are unequalled in serving your friends and
doing Good to all the World.—I know nobody like you.—Mary, my
Love, is not she a wonderful Creature?—Well—and now, what
House do you design to engage for them?—What is the size of
their family?’ ‘I do not at all know’—replied his Sister—‘have not
the least idea;—never heard any particulars;—but I am very sure
that the largest house at Sanditon cannot be too large. They are
more likely to want a second.—I shall take only one however, and
that, but for a week certain.—Miss Heywood, I astonish you.—You
hardly know what to make of me.—I see by your Looks, that you
are not used to such quick measures.’—The words ‘Unaccountable
Officiousness!—Activity run mad!’—had just passed through
Charlotte’s mind—but a civil answer was easy. ‘I dare say I do look
surprised,’ said she—‘because these are very great exertions, and I
know what Invalides both you and your Sister are.’ ‘Invalides
indeed.—I trust there are not three People in England who have
so sad a right to that appellation!—But my dear Miss Heywood, we
are sent into this World to be as extensively useful as possible, and
where some degree of Strength of Mind is given, it is not a feeble
body which will excuse us—or incline us to excuse ourselves.—
The World is pretty much divided between the Weak of Mind and
the Strong—between those who can act and those who can not,
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
60
and it is the bounden Duty of the Capable to let no opportunity of
being useful escape them.—My Sister’s Complaints and mine are
happily not often of a Nature, to threaten Existence immediately—
and as long as we can exert ourselves to be of use of others, I am
convinced that the Body is the better, for the refreshment the
Mind receives in doing its Duty.—While I have been travelling,
with this object in view, I have been perfectly well.’—The entrance
of the Children ended this little panegyric on her own
Disposition—and after having noticed and caressed them all,—she
prepared to go.—‘Cannot you dine with us?—Is not it possible to
prevail on you to dine with us?’ was then the cry; and that being
absolutely negatived, it was ‘And when shall we see you again?
and how can we be of use to you?’—and Mr. P. warmly offered his
assistance in taking the house for Mrs. G.—‘I will come to you the
moment I have dined,’ said he, ‘and we will go about together.’—
But this was immediately declined.—‘No, my dear Tom, upon no
account in the World, shall you stir a step on any business of
mine.—Your Ancle wants rest. I see by the position of your foot,
that you have used it too much already.—No, I shall go about my
House-taking directly. Our Dinner is not ordered till six—and by
that time I hope to have completed it. It is now only half past
four.—As to seeing me again today—I cannot answer for it; the
others will be at the Hotel all the Evening, and delighted to see
you at any time, but as soon as I get back I shall hear what Arthur
has done about our own Lodgings, and probably the moment
Dinner is over, shall be out again on business relative to them, for
we hope to get into some Lodgings or other and be settled after
breakfast tomorrow.—I have not much confidence in poor
Arthur’s skill for Lodging-taking, but he seemed to like the
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
61
commission.’ ‘I think you are doing too much,’ said Mr. P. ‘You
will knock yourself up. You should not move again after Dinner.’
‘No, indeed you should not,’ cried his wife, ‘for Dinner is such a
mere name with you all, that it can do you no good.—I know what
your appetites are.’ ‘My appetite is very much mended I assure
you lately. I have been taking some Bitters of my own decocting,
which have done wonders. Susan never eats I grant you—and just
at present I shall want nothing; I never eat for about a week after a
Journey—but as for Arthur, he is only too much disposed for
Food. We are often obliged to check him.’—‘But you have not told
me any thing of the other Family coming to Sanditon,’ said Mr. P.
as he walked with her to the door of the House—‘the Camberwell
Seminary; have we a good chance of them?’ ‘Oh! Certain—quite
certain.—I had forgotten them for the moment, but I had a letter
three days ago from my friend Mrs. Charles Dupuis which assured
me of Camberwell. Camberwell will be here to a certainty, and
very soon.—That good Woman (I do not know her name) not being
so wealthy and independant as Mrs. G.—can travel and chuse for
herself.—I will tell you how I got at her. Mrs. Charles Dupuis lives
almost next door to a Lady, who has a relation lately settled at
Clapham, who actually attends the Seminary and gives lessons on
Eloquence and Belles Lettres to some of the Girls.—I got that Man
a Hare from one of Sidney’s friends—and he recommended
Sanditon;—Without my appearing however—Mrs. Charles Dupuis
managed it all.’
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
62
CHAPTER X
t was not a week, since Miss Diana Parker had been told by
her feelings, that the Sea Air would probably in her present
state, be the death of her, and now she was at Sanditon,
intending to make some Stay, and without appearing to have the
slightest recollection of having written or felt any such thing.—It
was impossible for Charlotte not to suspect a good deal of fancy in
such an extraordinary state of health.—Disorders and Recoveries
so very much out of the common way, seemed more like the
amusement of eager Minds in want of employment than of actual
afflictions and relief. The Parkers, were no doubt a family of
Imagination and quick feelings—and while the eldest Brother
found vent for his superfluity of sensation as a Projector, the
Sisters were perhaps driven to dissipate theirs in the invention of
odd complaints.—The whole of their mental vivacity was evidently
not so employed; Part was laid out in a Zeal for being useful.—It
should seem that they must either be very busy for the Good of
others, or else extremely ill themselves. Some natural delicacy of
Constitution in fact, with an unfortunate turn for Medecine,
especially quack Medecine, had given them an early tendency at
various times, to various Disorders;—the rest of their sufferings
was from Fancy, the love of Distinction and the love of the
Wonderful.—They had Charitable hearts and many amiable
feelings—but a spirit of restless activity, and the glory of doing
more than anybody else, had their share in every exertion of
Benevolence—and there was Vanity in all they did, as well as in all
I
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
63
they endured.—Mr. and Mrs. P. spent a great part of the Evening
at the Hotel; but Charlotte had only two or three views of Miss
Diana posting over the Down after a House for this Lady whom
she had never seen, and who had never employed her. She was
not made acquainted with the others till the following day, when,
being removed into Lodgings and all the party continuing quite
well, their Brother and Sister and herself were entreated to drink
tea with them.—They were in one of the Terrace Houses—and she
found them arranged for the Evening in a small neat Drawing
room, with a beautiful view of the Sea if they had chosen it,—but
though it had been a very fair English Summer-day,—not only was
there no open window, but the Sopha and the Table, and the
Establishment in general was all at the other end of the room by a
brisk fire.—Miss P. whom, remembering the three Teeth drawn in
one day, Charlotte approached with a peculiar degree of respectful
Compassion, was not very unlike her Sister in person or manner—
tho’ more thin and worn by Illness and Medecine, more relaxed in
air, and more subdued in voice. She talked however, the whole
Evening as incessantly as Diana—and excepting that she sat with
salts in her hand, took Drops two or three times from one, out of
the several Phials already at home on the Mantelpiece,—and made
a great many odd faces and contortions, Charlotte could perceive
no symptoms of illness which she, in the boldness of her own good
health, would not have undertaken to cure, by putting out the fire,
opening the Window, and disposing of the Drops and the salts by
means of one or the other. She had had considerable curiosity to
see Mr. Arthur Parker; and having fancied him a very puny,
delicate-looking young Man, the smallest very materially of not a
robust Family, was astonished to find him quite as tall as his
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
64
Brother and a great deal Stouter—Broad made and Lusty—and
with no other look of an Invalide, than a sodden complexion.—
Diana was evidently the chief of the family; principal Mover and
Actor;—she had been on her Feet the whole Morning, on Mrs. G.’s
business or their own, and was still the most alert of the three.—
Susan had only superintended their final removal from the Hotel,
bringing two heavy Boxes herself; and Arthur had found the air so
cold that he had merely walked from one House to the other as
nimbly as he could,—and boasted much of sitting by the fire till he
had cooked up a very good one.—Diana, whose exercise had been
too domestic to admit of calculation, but who, by her own account,
had not once sat down during the space of seven hours, confessed
herself a little tired. She had been too successful however for
much fatigue; for not only had she by walking and talking down a
thousand difficulties at last secured a proper House at eight
guineas per week for Mrs. G.; she had also opened so many
Treaties with Cooks, Housemaids, Washer-women and Bathing
Women, that Mrs. G. would have little more to do on her arrival,
than to wave her hand and collect them around her for choice.—
Her concluding effort in the cause, had been a few polite lines of
Information to Mrs. G. herself—time not allowing for the
circuitous train of intelligence, which had been hitherto kept up,—
and she was now regaling in the delight of opening the first
Trenches of an acquaintance with such a powerful discharge of
unexpected Obligation. Mr. and Mrs. P.—and Charlotte had seen
two Post chaises crossing the Down to the Hotel as they were
setting off;—a joyful sight—and full of speculation.—The Miss
P.s—and Arthur had also seen something;—they could distinguish
from their window that there was an arrival at the Hotel, but not
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
65
its amount. Their Visitors answered for two Hack-Chaises.—Could
it be the Camberwell Seminary?—No—No.—Had there been a
third carriage, perhaps it might; but it was very generally agreed
that two Hack chaises could never contain a Seminary.—Mr. P.
was confident of another new Family.—When they were all finally
seated, after some removals to look at the Sea and the Hotel,
Charlotte’s place was by Arthur, who was sitting next to the Fire
with a degree of Enjoyment which gave a good deal of merit to his
civility in wishing her to take his Chair.—There was nothing
dubious in her manner of declining it, and he sat down again with
much satisfaction. She drew back her Chair to have all the
advantage of his Person as a screen, and was very thankful for
every inch of Back and Shoulders beyond her pre-conceived idea.
Arthur was heavy in Eye as well as figure, but by no means
indisposed to talk;—and while the other four were chiefly engaged
together, he evidently felt it no penance to have a fine young
Woman next to him, requiring in common Politeness some
attention—as his Brother who felt the decided want of some
motive for action, some Powerful object of animation for him,
observed with considerable pleasure.—Such was the influence of
Youth and Bloom that he began even to make a sort of apology for
having a Fire. ‘We should not have one at home,’ said he, ‘but the
Sea air is always damp. I am not afraid of any thing so much as
Damp.’ ‘I am so fortunate,’ said C. ‘as never to know whether the
air is damp or dry. It has always some property that is wholesome
and invigorating to me.’ ‘I like the Air too, as well as any body can;’
replied Arthur, ‘I am very fond of standing at an open Window
when there is no Wind—but unluckily a Damp air does not like
me.—It gives me the Rheumatism.—You are not rheumatic I
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
66
suppose?’ ‘Not at all.’ ‘That’s a great blessing.—But perhaps you
are nervous.’ ‘No—I believe not. I have no idea that I am.’—‘I am
very nervous.—To say the truth Nerves are the worst part of my
Complaints in my opinion. My Sisters think me Bilious, but I
doubt it.’ ‘You are quite in the right, to doubt it as long as you
possibly can, I am sure.’ ‘If I were Bilious,’ he continued, ‘you
know Wine would disagree with me, but it always does me good.—
The more Wine I drink (in Moderation) the better I am.—I am
always best of an Evening.—If you had seen me to-day before
Dinner, you would have thought me a very poor Creature.’
Charlotte could believe it. She kept her countenance however, and
said—‘As far as I can understand what nervous complaints are, I
have a great idea of the efficacy of air and exercise for them:—
daily, regular Exercise;—and I should recommend rather more of
it to you than I suspect you are in the habit of taking.’—‘Oh! I am
very fond of exercise myself’—he replied—‘and mean to walk a
great deal while I am here, if the Weather is temperate. I shall be
out every morning before breakfast—and take several turns upon
the Terrace, and you will often see me at Trafalgar House.’—‘But
you do not call a walk to Trafalgar House much exercise?’ ‘Not, as
to mere distance, but the Hill is so steep!—Walking up that Hill, in
the middle of the day, would throw me into such a Perspiration!—
You would see me all in a Bath by the time I got there!—I am very
subject to Perspiration, and there cannot be a surer sign of
Nervousness.’ They were now advancing so deep in Physics, that
Charlotte viewed the entrance of the Servant with the Tea things,
as a very fortunate Interruption.—It produced a great and
immediate change. The young Man’s attentions were instantly
lost. He took his own Cocoa from the Tray,—which seemed
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
67
provided with almost as many Teapots &c as there were persons
in company, Miss P. drinking one sort of Herb-Tea and Miss Diana
another, and turning completely to the Fire, sat coddling and
cooking it to his own satisfaction and toasting some Slices of
Bread, brought up ready-prepared in the Toast rack—and till it
was all done, she heard nothing of his voice but the murmuring of
a few broken sentences of self-approbation and success.—When
his Toils were over however, he moved back his Chair into as
gallant a Line as ever, and proved that he had not been working
only for himself, by his earnest invitation to her to take both Cocoa
and Toast.—She was already helped to Tea—which surprised
him—so totally self-engrossed had he been.—‘I thought I should
have been in time,’ said he, ‘but cocoa takes a great deal of
Boiling.’—‘I am much obliged to you,’ replied Charlotte—‘but I
prefer Tea.’ ‘Then I will help myself,’ said he.—‘A large Dish of
rather weak Cocoa every evening, agrees with me better than any
thing.’—It struck her however, as he poured out this rather weak
Cocoa, that it came forth in a very fine, dark coloured stream—and
at the same moment, his Sisters both crying out—‘Oh! Arthur, you
get your Cocoa stronger and stronger every Evening’, with
Arthur’s somewhat conscious reply of ‘Tis rather stronger than it
should be tonight’—convinced her that Arthur was by no means so
fond of being starved as they could desire, or as he felt proper
himself.—He was certainly very happy to turn the conversation on
dry Toast, and hear no more of his sisters.—‘I hope you will eat
some of this Toast,’ said he, ‘I reckon myself a very good Toaster; I
never burn my Toasts—I never put them too near the Fire at
first—and yet, you see, there is not a Corner but what is well
browned.—I hope you like dry Toast.’—‘With a reasonable
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
68
quantity of Butter spread over it, very much’—said Charlotte—
‘but not otherwise.’ ‘No more do I’—said he exceedingly pleased—
‘We think quite alike there.—So far from dry Toast being
wholesome, I think it a very bad thing for the Stomach. Without a
little butter to soften it, it hurts the Coats of the Stomach I am sure
it does.—I will have the pleasure of spreading some for you
directly—and afterwards I will spread some for myself.—Very bad
indeed for the Coats of the Stomach—but there is no convincing
some people.—It irritates and acts like a nutmeg grater.’ He could
not get command of the Butter however, without a struggle; His
Sisters accusing him of eating a great deal too much, and
declaring he was not to be trusted;—and he maintaining that he
only eat enough to secure the Coats of his Stomach;—and besides,
he only wanted it now for Miss Heywood.—Such a plea must
prevail, he got the butter and spread away for her with an
accuracy of Judgement which at least delighted himself; but when
her Toast was done, and he took his own in hand, Charlotte could
hardly contain herself as she saw him watching his sisters, while
he scrupulously scraped off almost as much butter as he put on,
and then seize an odd moment for adding a great dab just before it
went into his Mouth.—Certainly, Mr. Arthur P.’s enjoyments in
Invalidism were very different from his sisters—by no means so
spiritualized.—A good deal of Earthy Dross hung about him.
Charlotte could not but suspect him of adopting that line of Life,
principally for the indulgence of an indolent Temper—and to be
determined on having no Disorders but such as called for warm
rooms and good Nourishment.—In one particular however, she
soon found that he had caught something from them.—‘What!’ said
he—‘Do you venture upon two dishes of strong Green Tea in one
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
69
Evening?—What Nerves you must have!—How I envy you.—Now,
if I were to swallow only one such dish—what do you think it’s
effect would be upon me?’ ‘Keep you awake perhaps all night’—
replied Charlotte, meaning to overthrow his attempts at Surprise,
by the Grandeur of her own Conceptions.—‘Oh! if that were all!’—
he exclaimed.—‘No—it acts on me like Poison and would entirely
take away the use of my right side, before I had swallowed it five
minutes.—It sounds almost incredible—but it has happened to me
so often that I cannot doubt it.—The use of my right Side is
entirely taken away for several hours!’ ‘It sounds rather odd to be
sure’—answered Charlotte coolly—‘but I dare say it would be
proved to be the simplest thing in the World, by those who have
studied right sides and Green Tea scientifically and thoroughly
understand all the possibilities of their action on each other.’—
Soon after Tea, a Letter was brought to Miss D. P. from the
Hotel.—‘From Mrs. Charles Dupuis’—said she,—‘some private
hand.’—And having read a few lines, exclaimed aloud ‘Well, this is
very extraordinary! very extraordinary indeed!—That both should
have the same name.—Two Mrs. Griffiths!—This is a Letter of
recommendation and introduction to me, of the Lady from
Camberwell—and her name happens to be Griffiths too.’ A few
lines more however, and the colour rushed into her Cheeks, and
with much Perturbation she added—‘The oddest thing that ever
was!—a Miss Lambe too!—a young West-indian of large
Fortune.—But it cannot be the same.—Impossible that it should be
the same.—She read the Letter aloud for comfort.—It was merely
to ‘introduce the Bearer, Mrs. G.— from Camberwell, and the
three young Ladies under her care, to Miss D. P.’s notice. Mrs.
G.— being a stranger at Sanditon, was anxious for a respectable
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
70
Introduction—and Mrs. C. Dupuis therefore, at the instance of the
intermediate friend, provided her with this Letter, knowing that
she could not do her dear Diana a greater kindness than by giving
her the means of being useful.—Mrs. G.’s chief solicitude would be
for the accommodation and comfort of one of the young Ladies
under her care, a Miss Lambe, a young W. Indian of large Fortune,
in delicate health.’—‘It was very strange!—very remarkable!—very
extraordinary’ but they were all agreed in determining it to be
impossible that there should not be two Families; such a totally
distinct set of people as were concerned in the reports of each
made that matter quite certain. There must be two Families.—
Impossible to be otherwise. ‘Impossible’ and ‘Impossible’, was
repeated over and over again with great fervour.—An accidental
resemblance of Names and circumstances, however striking at
first, involved nothing really incredible—and so it was settled.—
Miss Diana herself derived an immediate advantage to
counterbalance her Perplexity. She must put her shawl over her
shoulders, and be running about again. Tired as she was, she must
instantly repair to the Hotel, to investigate the truth and offer her
services.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
71
CHAPTER XI
t would not do.—Not all that the whole Parker race could say
among themselves, could produce a happier catastrophée
than that the Family from Surry and the Family from
Camberwell were one and the same.—The rich West-indians, and
the young Ladies Seminary had all entered Sanditon in those two
Hack chaises. The Mrs. G. who in her friend Mrs. Darling’s hands,
had wavered as to coming and been unequal to the Journey, was
the very same Mrs. G. whose plans were at the same period (under
another representation) perfectly decided, and who was without
fears or difficulties.—All that had the appearance of Incongruity in
the reports of the two, might very fairly be placed to the account of
the Vanity, the Ignorance, or the blunders of the many engaged in
the cause by the vigilance and caution of Miss Diana P.—Her
intimate friends must be officious like herself, and the subject had
supplied Letters and Extracts and Messages enough to make
everything appear what it was not. Miss D. probably felt a little
awkward on being first obliged to admit her mistake. A long
Journey from Hampshire taken for nothing—a Brother
disappointed—an expensive House on her hands for a week, must
have been some of her immediate reflections—and much worse
than all the rest, must have been the sort of sensation of being less
clear-sighted and infallible than she had believed herself.—No
part of it however seemed to trouble her long. There were so many
to share in the shame and the blame, that probably when she had
divided out their proper portions to Mrs. Darling, Miss Capper,
I
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
72
Fanny Noyce, Mrs. Dupuis and Mrs. C.D.’s Neighbour, there
might be a mere trifle of reproach remaining for herself.—At any
rate, she was seen all the following morning walking about after
Lodgings with Mrs. G.—as alert as ever.—Mrs. G. was a very well-
behaved, genteel kind of Woman, who supported herself by
receiving such great girls and young Ladies, as wanted either
Masters for finishing their Education, or a home for beginning
their Displays—She had several more under her care than the
three who were now come to Sanditon, but the others all
happened to be absent.—Of these three, and indeed of all, Miss
Lambe was beyond comparison the most important and precious,
as she paid in proportion to her fortune.—She was about
seventeen, half Mulatto, chilly and tender, had a maid of her own,
was to have the best room in the Lodgings, and was always of the
first consequence in every plan of Mrs. G.—The other Girls, two
Miss Beauforts were just such young Ladies as may be met with,
in at least one family out of three, throughout the Kingdom; they
had tolerable complexions, shewey figures, an upright decided
carriage and an assured Look;—they were very accomplished and
very Ignorant, their time being divided between such pursuits as
might attract admiration, and those Labours and Expedients of
dexterous Ingenuity, by which they could dress in a stile much
beyond what they ought to have afforded; they were some of the
first in every change of fashion and the object of all, was to
captivate some Man of much better fortune than their own.—Mrs.
G. had preferred a small, retired place, like Sanditon, on Miss
Lambe’s account—and the Miss B.s, though naturally preferring
any thing to Smallness and Retirement, yet having in the course of
the Spring been involved in the inevitable expense of six new
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
73
Dresses each for a three days visit, were constrained to be satisfied
with Sanditon also, till their circumstances were retrieved. There,
with the hire of a Harp for one, and the purchase of some Drawing
paper for the other and all the finery they could already command,
they meant to be very economical, very elegant and very secluded;
with the hope on Miss Beaufort’s side, of praise and celebrity from
all who walked within the sound of her Instrument, and on Miss
Letitia’s, of curiosity and rapture in all who came near her while
she sketched—and to Both, the consolation of meaning to be the
most stylish Girls in the Place.—The particular introduction of
Mrs. G. to Miss Diana Parker, secured them immediately an
acquaintance with the Trafalgar House-family, and with the
Denhams;—and the Miss Beauforts were soon satisfied with ‘the
Circle in which they moved in Sanditon’ to use a proper phrase,
for every body must now ‘move in a Circle’,—to the prevalence of
which rototory Motion, is perhaps to be attributed the Giddiness
and false steps of many.—Lady Denham had other motives for
calling on Mrs. G. besides attention to the Parkers.—In Miss
Lambe, here was the very young Lady, sickly and rich, whom she
had been asking for; and she made the acquaintance for Sir
Edward’s sake, and the sake of her Milch asses. How it might
answer with regard to the Baronet, remained to be proved, but as
to the Animals, she soon found that all her calculations of Profit
would be vain. Mrs. G. would not allow Miss L. to have the
smallest sympton of a Decline, or any complaint which Asses milk
could possibly relieve. ‘Miss L. was under the constant care of an
experienced Physician;—and his Prescriptions must be their
rule’—and except in favour of some Tonic Pills, which a Cousin of
her own had a Property in, Mrs. G. did never deviate from the
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
74
strict Medecinal page.—The corner house of the Terrace was the
one in which Miss D.P. had the pleasure of settling her new
friends, and considering that it commanded in front the favourite
Lounge of all the Visitors at Sanditon, and on one side, whatever
might be going on at the Hotel, there could not have been a more
favourable spot for the seclusions of the Miss Beauforts. And
accordingly, long before they had suited themselves with an
Instrument, or with Drawing paper, they had, by the frequency of
their appearance at the low Windows upstairs, in order to close
the blinds, or open the Blinds, to arrange a flower pot on the
Balcony, or look at nothing through a Telescope, attracted many
an eye upwards, and made many a Gazer gaze again.—A little
Novelty has a great effect in so small a place; the Miss Beauforts,
who would have been nothing at Brighton, could not move here
without notice;—and even Mr. Arthur Parker, though little
disposed for supernumerary exertion, always quitted the Terrace,
in his way to his Brothers by this corner House, for the sake of a
glimpse of the Miss Bs, though it was half a quarter of a mile
round about, and added two steps to the ascent of the Hill.
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
75
CHAPTER XII
harlotte had been ten days at Sanditon without seeing
Sanditon House, every attempt at calling on Lady D.
having been defeated by meeting with her beforehand.
But now it was to be more resolutely undertaken, at a more early
hour, that nothing might be neglected of attention to Lady D. or
amusement to Charlotte.—‘And if you should find a favourable
opening my Love,’ said Mr. P. (who did not mean to go with
them)—‘I think you had better mention the poor Mullins’s
situation, and sound her Ladyship as to a Subscription for them. I
am not fond of charitable subscriptions in a place of this kind—It
is a sort of tax upon all that come—Yet as their distress is very
great and I almost promised the poor Woman yesterday to get
something done for her, I believe we must set a subscription on
foot—and therefore the sooner the better,—and Lady Denham’s
name at the head of the List will be a very necessary beginning.—
You will not dislike speaking to her about it, Mary?’—‘I will do
whatever you wish me,’ replied his Wife—‘but you would do it so
much better yourself. I shall not know what to say.’—‘My dear
Mary,’ cried he, ‘it is impossible you can be really at a loss.
Nothing can be more simple. You have only to state the present
afflicted situation of the family, their earnest application to me,
and my being willing to promote a little subscription for their
relief, provided it meet with her approbation.’ ‘The easiest thing in
the World’—cried Miss Diana Parker who happened to be calling
on them at the moment. ‘All said and done, in less time than you
C
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
76
have been talking of it now.—And while you are on the subject of
subscriptions Mary, I will thank you to mention a very melancholy
case to Lady D. which has been represented to me in the most
affecting terms.—There is a poor Woman in Worcestershire,
whom some friends of mine are exceedingly interested about, and
I have undertaken to collect whatever I can for her. If you would
mention the circumstance to Lady Denham!—Lady Denham can
give, if she is properly attacked—and I look upon her to be the sort
of Person who, when once she is prevailed on to undraw her
Purse, would as readily give ten guineas as five.—And therefore, if
you find her in a Giving mood, you might as well speak in favour of
another Charity which I and a few more, have very much at heart:
the establishment of a Charitable Repository at Burton on
Trent.—And then,—there is the family of the poor Man who was
hung last assizes at York, tho’ we really have raised the sum we
wanted for putting them all out, yet if you can get a Guinea from
her on their behalf, it may as well be done.’ ‘My dear Diana!’
exclaimed Mrs. P.—‘I could no more mention these things to Lady
D. than I could fly.’—‘Where’s the difficulty?—I wish I could go
with you myself—but in five minutes I must be at Mrs. G.—to
encourage Miss Lambe in taking her first Dip. She is so
frightened, poor Thing, that I promised to come and keep up her
Spirits, and go in the Machine with her if she wished it—and as
soon as that is over, I must hurry home, for Susan is to have
Leaches at one o’clock—which will be a three hours business,—
therefore I really have not a moment to spare—besides that
(between ourselves) I ought to be in bed myself at this present
time, for I am hardly able to stand—and when the Leaches have
done, I dare say we shall both go to our rooms for the rest of the
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
77
day.’—‘I am sorry to hear it, indeed; but if this is the case I hope
Arthur will come to us.’—‘If Arthur takes my advice, he will go to
bed too, for if he stays up by himself, he will certainly eat and
drink more than he ought;—but you see Mary, how impossible it is
for me to go with you to Lady Denham’s.’—‘Upon second thoughts
Mary,’ said her husband, ‘I will not trouble you to speak about the
Mullins.—I will take an opportunity of seeing Lady D. myself.—I
know how little it suits you to be pressing matters upon a Mind at
all unwilling.’—His application thus withdrawn, his sister could
say no more in support of hers, which was his object, as he felt all
their impropriety and all the certainty of their ill effect upon his
own better claim.—Mrs P. was delighted at this release, and set off
very happy with her friend and her little girl, on this walk to
Sanditon House.—It was a close, misty morning, and when they
reached the brow of the Hill, they could not for some time make
out what sort of Carriage it was, which they saw coming up. It
appeared at different moments to be everything from the Gig to
the Pheaton, from one horse to four; and just as they were
concluding in favour of a Tandem, little Mary’s young eyes
distinguished the Coachman and she eagerly called out, ‘’Tis
Uncle Sidney Mama, it is indeed.’ And so it proved.—Mr. Sidney
Parker driving his Servant in a very neat Carriage was soon
opposite to them, and they all stopped for a few minutes. The
manners of the Parkers were always pleasant among themselves—
and it was a very friendly meeting between Sidney and his sister-
in-law, who was most kindly taking it for granted that he was on
his way to Trafalgar House. This he declined however. ‘He was
just come from Eastbourne, proposing to spend two or three days,
as it might happen, at Sanditon—but the Hotel must be his
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
78
Quarters—He was expecting to be joined there by a friend or
two.’—The rest was common enquiries and remarks, with kind
notice of little Mary, and a very well-bred Bow and proper address
to Miss Heywood on her being named to him—and they parted, to
meet again within a few hours.—Sidney Parker was about seven
or eight and twenty, very good-looking, with a decided air of Ease
and Fashion, and a lively countenance.—This adventure afforded
agreable discussion for some time. Mrs. P. entered into all her
Husband’s joy on the occasion, and exulted in the credit which
Sidney’s arrival would give to the place. The road to Sanditon H.
was a broad, handsome, planted approach, between fields, and
conducting at the end of a quarter of a mile through second Gates
into the Grounds, which though not extensive had all the Beauty
and Respectability which an abundance of very fine Timber could
give.—These Entrance Gates were so much in a corner of the
Grounds or Paddock, so near one of its Boundaries, that an
outside fence was at first almost pressing on the road—till an
angle here, and a curve there threw them to a better distance. The
Fence was a proper Park paling in excellent condition; with
clusters of fine Elms, or rows of old Thorns following its line
almost every where.—Almost must be stipulated—for there were
vacant spaces—and through one of these, Charlotte as soon as
they entered the Enclosure, caught a glimpse over the pales of
something White and Womanish in the field on the other side;—it
was something which immediately brought Miss B. into her
head—and stepping to the pales, she saw indeed—and very
decidedly, in spite of the Mist; Miss B. seated, not far before her, at
the foot of the bank which sloped down from the outside of the
Paling and which a narrow Path seemed to skirt along;—Miss
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
79
Brereton seated apparently very composedly—and Sir E.D. by her
side.—They were sitting so near each other and appeared so
closely engaged in gentle conversation, that Charlotte instantly felt
she had nothing to do but to step back again, and say not a
word.—Privacy was certainly their object.—It could not but strike
her rather unfavourably with regard to Clara;—but hers was a
situation which must not be judged with severity.—She was glad
to perceive that nothing had been discerned by Mrs Parker; If
Charlotte had not been considerably the tallest of the two, Miss
B.’s white ribbons might not have fallen within the ken of her
more observant eyes.—Among other points of moralising
reflection which the sight of this Tete a Tete produced, Charlotte
could not but think of the extreme difficulty which secret Lovers
must have in finding a proper spot for their stolen Interviews.—
Here perhaps they had thought themselves so perfectly secure
from observation—the whole field open before them—a steep
bank and Pales never crossed by the foot of Man at their back—
and a great thickness of air, in aid. Yet here, she had seen them.
They were really ill-used.—The House was large and handsome;
two Servants appeared, to admit them, and everything had a
suitable air of Property and Order.—Lady D. valued herself upon
her liberal Establishment, and had great enjoyment in the order
and the Importance of her style of living.—They were shewn into
the usual sitting room, well-proportioned and well-furnished;—
tho’ it was Furniture rather originally good and extremely well
kept, than new or shewey—and as Lady D. was not there,
Charlotte had leisure to look about, and to be told by Mrs. P. that
the whole-length Portrait of a stately Gentleman, which placed
over the Mantlepeice, caught the eye immediately, was the picture
Jane Austen: Sanditon
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                     ElecBook
80
of Sir H. Denham—and that one among many Miniatures in
another part of the room, little conspicuous, represented Mr.
Hollis.—Poor Mr. Hollis!—It was impossible not to feel him hardly
used; to be obliged to stand back in his own House and see the
best place by the fire constantly occupied by Sir H. D.
