The
Watsons
Jane Austen
This file is free for individual use only. It must not be altered or resold.
Organisations wishing to use it must first obtain a licence.
Low cost licenses are available. Contact us through our web site 
© The Electric Book Co 1998
The Electric Book Company Ltd
20 Cambridge Drive, London SE12 8AJ, UK
www.elecbook.com
ELECBOOK CLASSICS
ebc0051. Jane Austen: The Watsons
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
3
THE WATSONS
he first winter assembly in the Town of D. in Surry was to
be held on Tuesday October the 13th, and it was generally
expected to be a very good one; a long list of Country
Families was confidently run over as sure of attending, and
sanguine hopes were entertained that the Osbornes themselves
would be there.—The Edwardes’ invitation to the Watsons
followed of course. The Edwardes were people of fortune who
lived in the Town and kept their coach; the Watsons inhabited a
village about three miles distant, were poor and had no close
carriage; and ever since there had been Balls in the place, the
former were accustomed to invite the Latter to dress dine and
sleep at their House, on every monthly return throughout the
winter.—On the present occasion, as only two of Mr. W.’s children
were at home, and one was always necessary as companion to
himself, for he was sickly and had lost his wife, one only could
profit by the kindness of their friends; Miss Emma Watson who
was very recently returned to her family from the care of an Aunt
who had brought her up, was to make her first public appearance
in the Neighbourhood; and her eldest sister, whose delight in a
Ball was not lessened by a ten years Enjoyment, had some merit in
chearfully undertaking to drive her and all her finery in the old
chair to D. on the important morning.—As they splashed along the
dirty Lane Miss Watson thus instructed and cautioned her
T
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
4
inexperienced sister.—‘I dare say it will be a very good Ball, and
among so many officers, you will hardly want partners. You will
find Mrs. Edwardes’ maid very willing to help you, and I would
advise you to ask Mary Edwardes’ opinion if you are at all at a loss
for she has a very good Taste.—If Mr. E. does not lose his money at
cards, you will stay as late as you can wish for; if he does, he will
hurry you home perhaps—but you are sure of some comfortable
soup.—I hope you will be in good looks. I should not be surprised
if you were to be thought one of the prettiest girls in the room,
there is a great deal in Novelty. Perhaps Tom Musgrave may take
notice of you—but I would advise you by all means not to give him
any encouragement. He generally pays attention to every new girl,
but he is a great flirt and never means anything serious.’ ‘I think I
have heard you speak of him before,’ said Emma. ‘Who is he?’ ‘A
young Man of very good fortune, quite independant, and
remarkably agreable, an universal favourite wherever he goes.
Most of the girls hereabouts are in love with him, or have been. I
believe I am the only one among them that have escaped with a
whole heart, and yet I was the first he paid attention to, when he
came into this Country, six years ago; and very great attention
indeed did he pay me. Some people say that he has never seemed
to like any girl so well since, tho’ he is always behaving in a
particular way to one or another.’—
‘And how came your heart to be the only cold one?’ said Emma
smiling. ‘There was a reason for that’—replied Miss W. changing
colour.—‘I have not been very well used Emma among them, I
hope you will have better luck.’—‘Dear Sister, I beg your pardon,
if I have unthinkingly given you pain.’—‘When first we knew Tom
Musgrave,’ continued Miss W. without seeming to hear her, ‘I was
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
5
very much attached to a young Man of the name of Purvis a
particular friend of Robert’s, who used to be with us a great deal.
Every body thought it would have been a Match.’ A sigh
accompanied these words, which Emma respected in silence—but
her sister after a short pause went on—‘You will naturally ask why
it did not take place, and why he is married to another Woman,
while I am still single.—But you must ask him—not me—you must
ask Penelope.—Yes Emma, Penelope was at the bottom of it all.—
She thinks everything fair for a Husband; I trusted her, she set
him against me, with a view of gaining him herself and it ended in
his discontinuing his visits and soon after marrying somebody
else.—Penelope makes light of her conduct, but I think such
Treachery very bad. It has been the ruin of my happiness. I shall
never love any Man as I loved Purvis. I do not think Tom
Musgrave should be named with him in the same day.’—‘You
quite shock me by what you say of Penelope’—said Emma. ‘Could
a sister do such a thing?—Rivalry, Treachery between sisters!—I
shall be afraid of being acquainted with her—but I hope it was not
so. Appearances were against her’—‘You do not know Penelope.—
There is nothing she would not do to get married—she would as
good as tell you so herself.—Do not trust her with any secrets of
your own, take warning by me, do not trust her; she has her good
qualities, but she has no Faith, no Honour, no Scruples, if she can
promote her own advantage.—I wish with all my heart she was
well married. I declare I had rather have her well-married than
myself.’—‘Than yourself!—Yes I can suppose so. A heart, wounded
like yours can have little inclination for Matrimony.’—‘Not much
indeed—but you know we must marry.—I could do very well
single for my own part—A little Company, and a pleasant Ball now
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
6
and then, would be enough for me, if one could be young for ever,
but my Father cannot provide for us, and it is very bad to grow old
and be poor and laughed at.—I have lost Purvis, it is true but very
few people marry their first Loves. I should not refuse a man
because he was not Purvis. Not that I can ever quite forgive
Penelope.’—Emma shook her head in acquiescence.—‘Penelope
however has had her Troubles’—continued Miss W.—‘she was
sadly disappointed in Tom Musgrave, who afterwards transferred
his attentions from me to her, and whom she was very fond of; but
he never means anything serious, and when he had trifled with
her long enough, he began to slight her for Margaret, and poor
Penelope was very wretched. And since then, she has been trying
to make some match at Chichester; she wont tell us with whom,
but I believe it is a rich old Dr. Harding, Uncle to the friend she
goes to see;—and she has taken a vast deal of trouble about him
and given up a great deal of Time to no purpose as yet.—When she
went away the other day she said it should be the last time.—I
suppose you did not know what her particular Business was at
Chichester—nor guess at the object that could take her away, from
Stanton just as you were coming home after so many years
absence.’—‘No indeed, I had not the smallest suspicion of it. I
considered her engagement to Mrs. Shaw just at that time as very
unfortunate for me. I had hoped to find all my sisters at home; to
be able to make an immediate friend of each.’—‘I suspect the Dr.
to have an attack of the Asthma,—and that she was hurried away
on that account—the Shaws are quite on her side.—At least I
believe so—but she tells me nothing. She professes to keep her
own counsel; she says, and truly enough, that “too many Cooks
spoil the Broth”.’—‘I am sorry for her anxieties,’ said Emma,—‘but
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
7
I do not like her plans or her opinions. I shall be afraid of her.—
She must have too masculine and bold a temper.—To be so bent
on Marriage—to pursue a Man merely for the sake of situation—is
a sort of thing that shocks me; I cannot understand it. Poverty is a
great Evil, but to a woman of Education and feeling it ought not, it
cannot be the greatest.—I would rather be Teacher at a school
(and I can think of nothing worse) than marry a Man I did not
like.’—‘I would rather do any thing than be Teacher at a school’—
said her sister. ‘I have been at school, Emma, and know what a
Life they lead; you never have.—I should not like marrying a
disagreable Man any more than yourself,—but I do not think there
are many very disagreable Men;—I think I could like any good
humoured Man with a comfortable Income.—I suppose my Aunt
brought you up to be rather refined.’ ‘Indeed I do not know.—My
conduct must tell you how I have been brought up. I am no judge
of it myself. I cannot compare my Aunt’s method with any other
persons, because I know no other.’—‘But I can see in a great many
things that you are very refined. I have observed it ever since you
came home, and I am afraid it will not be for your happiness.
Penelope will laugh at you very much.’ ‘That will not be for my
happiness I am sure.—If my opinions are wrong, I must correct
them—if they are above my situation, I must endeavour to conceal
them.—But I doubt whether Ridicule,—Has Penelope much
wit?’—‘Yes—she has great spirits, and never cares what she
says.’—‘Margaret is more gentle I imagine?’—‘Yes—especially in
company; she is all gentleness and mildness when anybody is
by.—But she is a little fretful and perverse among ourselves.—
Poor creature! she is possessed with the notion of Tom Musgrave’s
being more seriously in love with her, than he ever was with any
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
8
body else, and is always expecting him to come to the point. This is
the second time within this twelvemonth that she has gone to
spend a month with Robert and Jane on purpose to egg him on, by
her absence—but I am sure she is mistaken, and that he will no
more follow her to Croydon now than he did last March.—He will
never marry unless he can marry somebody very great; Miss
Osborne perhaps, or something in that stile.’ ‘Your account of this
Tom Musgrave, Elizabeth, gives me very little inclination for his
acquaintance.’ ‘You are afraid of him, I do not wonder at you.’—
‘No indeed—I dislike and despise him.’—‘Dislike and Despise Tom
Musgrave! No, that you never can. I defy you not to be delighted
with him if he takes notice of you.—I hope he will dance with
you—and I dare say he will, unless the Osbornes come with a large
party, and then he will not speak to any body else.’ ‘He seems to
have most engaging manners!’—said Emma.—‘Well, we shall see
how irresistable Mr. Tom Musgrave and I find each other.—I
suppose I shall know him as soon as I enter the Ball-room; he must
carry some of his Charm in his face.’—‘You will not find him in the
Ball-room I can tell you, You will go early that Mrs. Edwardes may
get a good place by the fire, and he never comes till late; and if the
Osbornes are coming, he will wait in the Passage, and come in
with them.—I should like to look in upon you Emma. If it was but
a good day with my Father, I would wrap myself up, and James
should drive me over, as soon as I had made Tea for him; and I
should be with you by the time the Dancing began.’ ‘What! would
you come late at night in this Chair?’—‘To be sure I would.—
There, I said you were very refined;—and that’s an instance of
it.’—Emma for a moment made no answer—at last she said—‘I
wish Elizabeth, you had not made a point of my going to this Ball,
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
9
I wish you were going instead of me. Your pleasure would be
greater than mine. I am a stranger here, and know nobody but the
Edwardes; my Enjoyment therefore must be very doubtful. Yours
among all your acquaintance would be certain.—It is not too late
to change. Very little apology could be requisite to the Edwardes,
who must be more glad of your company than of mine, and I
should most readily return to my Father; and should not be at all
afraid to drive this quiet old Creature, home. Your Cloathes I
would undertake to find means of sending to you.’—‘My dearest
Emma’ cried Elizabeth warmly—‘do you think I would do such a
thing? Not for the Universe—but I shall never forget your
goodnature in proposing it. You must have a sweet temper
indeed;—I never met with any thing like it!—And would you really
give up the Ball, that I might be able to go to it!—Believe me
Emma, I am not so selfish as that comes to. No, tho’ I am nine
years older than you are, I would not be the means of keeping you
from being seen.—You are very pretty, and it would be very hard
that you should not have as fair a chance as we have all had, to
make your fortune.—No Emma, whoever stays at home this
winter, it shan’t be you. I am sure I should never have forgiven the
person who kept me from a Ball at nineteen.’ Emma expressed her
gratitude, and for a few minutes they jogged on in silence.—
Elizabeth first spoke.—‘You will take notice who Mary Edwardes
dances with.’—‘I will remember her partners if I can—but you
know they will be all strangers to me.’ ‘Only observe whether she
dances with Captain Hunter, more than once; I have my fears in
that quarter. Not that her Father or Mother like officers, but if she
does you know, it is all over with poor Sam.—And I have promised
to write him word who she dances with.’ ‘Is Sam attached to Miss
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
10
Edwardes?’—‘Did not you know that?’—‘How should I know it?
How should I know in Shropshire, what is passing of that nature
in Surry? It is not likely that circumstances of such delicacy
should make any part of the scanty communication which passed
between you and me for the last fourteen years.’ ‘I wonder I never
mentioned it when I wrote. Since you have been at home, I have
been so busy with my poor Father and our great wash that I have
had no leisure to tell you anything—but indeed I concluded you
knew it all.—He has been very much in love with her these two
years, and it is a great disappointment to him that he cannot
always get away to our Balls—but Mr. Curtis won’t often spare
him, and just now it is a sickly time at Guilford—’ ‘Do you suppose
Miss Edwardes inclined to like him?’ ‘I am afraid not: You know
she is an only Child, and will have at least ten thousand pounds.’—
‘But still she may like our Brother.’ ‘Oh! no —. The Edwardes look
much higher. Her Father and Mother would never consent to it.
Sam is only a Surgeon you know.—Sometimes I think she does
like him. But Mary Edwardes is rather prim and reserved; I do not
always know what she would be at.’—‘Unless Sam feels on sure
grounds with the Lady herself, it seems a pity to me that he should
be encouraged to think of her at all.’—‘A young Man must think of
somebody,’ said Elizabeth—‘and why should not he be as lucky as
Robert, who has got a good wife and six thousand pounds?’ ‘We
must not all expect to be individually lucky’ replied Emma. ‘The
Luck of one member of a Family is Luck to all.’ ‘Mine is all to
come I am sure’—said Elizabeth giving another sigh to the
remembrance of Purvis.—‘I have been unlucky enough, and I
cannot say much for you, as my Aunt married again so foolishly.—
Well—you will have a good Ball I dare say. The next turning will
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
11
bring us to the Turnpike. You may see the Church Tower over the
hedge, and the White Hart is close by it.—I shall long to know
what you think of Tom Musgrave.’ Such were the last audible
sounds of Miss Watson’s voice, before they passed thro’ the
Turnpike gate and entered on the pitching of the Town—the
jumbling and noise of which made farther Conversation most
thoroughly undesirable.—The old Mare trotted heavily on,
wanting no direction of the reins to take the right Turning, and
making only one Blunder, in proposing to stop at the Milleners,
before she drew up towards Mr. Edwardes’ door.—Mr. E. lived in
the best house in the Street, and the best in the place, if Mr.
Tomlinson the Banker might be indulged in calling his newly
erected House at the end of the Town with a Shrubbery and sweep
in the Country.—Mr. E.’s House was higher than most of its
neighbours with two windows on each side the door, the windows
guarded by posts and chain, the door approached by a flight of
stone steps.—‘Here we are’—said Elizabeth—as the Carriage
ceased moving—‘safely arrived;—and by the Market Clock, we
have been only five and thirty minutes coming,—which I think is
doing pretty well, tho’ it would be nothing for Penelope.—Is not it
a nice Town?—The Edwardes’ have a noble house you see, and
they live quite in stile. The door will be opened by a Man in Livery
with a powder’d head, I can tell you.’
Emma had seen the Edwardes only one morning at Stanton,
they were therefore all but Strangers to her, and tho’ her spirits
were by no means insensible to the expected joys of the Evening,
she felt a little uncomfortable in the thought of all that was to
precede them. Her conversation with Elizabeth too giving her
some very unpleasant feelings, with respect to her own family, had
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
12
made her more open to disagreable impressions from any other
cause, and increased her sense of the awkwardness of rushing into
Intimacy on so slight an acquaintance.—There was nothing in the
manners of Mrs. or Miss Edwardes to give immediate change to
these Ideas;—the Mother tho’ a very friendly woman, had a
reserved air, and a great deal of formal Civility—and the daughter,
a genteel looking girl of twenty-two, with her hair in papers,
seemed very naturally to have caught something of the stile of the
Mother who had brought her up.—Emma was soon left to know
what they could be, by Elizabeth’s being obliged to hurry away—
and some very, very languid remarks on the probable Brilliancy of
the Ball, were all that broke at intervals a silence of half an hour
before they were joined by the Master of the house.—Mr.
Edwardes had a much easier, and more communicative air than
the Ladies of the Family; he was fresh from the Street, and he
came ready to tell what ever might interest.—After a cordial
reception of Emma, he turned to his daughter with ‘Well Mary, I
bring you good news.—The Osbornes will certainly be at the Ball
tonight.—Horses for two Carriages are ordered from the White
Hart, to be at Osborne Castle by nine.’ ‘I am glad of it’—observed
Mrs. E., ‘because their coming gives a credit to our Assemblies.
The Osbornes being known to have been at the first Ball, will
dispose a great many people to attend the second.—It is more than
they deserve, for in fact they add nothing to the pleasure of the
Evening, they come so late, and go so early;—but Great People
have always their charm.’—Mr. Edwardes proceeded to relate
every other little article of news which his morning’s lounge had
supplied him with, and they chatted with greater briskness, till
Mrs. E.’s moment for dressing arrived, and the young Ladies were
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
13
carefully recommended to lose no time. Emma was shewn to a
very comfortable apartment, and as soon as Mrs. E.’s civilities
could leave her to herself, the happy occupation, the first Bliss of a
Ball began.—The girls, dressing in some measure together, grew
unavoidably better acquainted; Emma found in Miss E.—the shew
of good sense, a modest unpretending mind, and a great wish of
obliging—and when they returned to the parlour where Mrs. E.
was sitting respectably attired in one of the two Sattin gowns
which went thro’ the winter, and a new cap from the Milliners,
they entered it with much easier feelings and more natural smiles
than they had taken away.—Their dress was now to be examined;
Mrs. Edwards acknowledged herself too old-fashioned to approve
of every modern extravagance however sanctioned—and tho’
complacently viewing her daughter’s good looks, would give but a
qualified admiration; and Mr. E. not less satisfied with Mary, paid
some Compliments of good humoured Gallantry to Emma at her
expence.—The discussion led to more intimate remarks, and Miss
Edwardes gently asked Emma if she were not often reckoned very
like her youngest brother.—Emma thought she could perceive a
faint blush accompany the question, and there seemed something
still more suspicious in the manner in which Mr. E. took up the
subject.—‘You are paying Miss Emma no great compliment I think
Mary,’ said he hastily. ‘Mr. Sam Watson is a very good sort of
young Man, and I dare say a very clever Surgeon, but his
complexion has been rather too much exposed to all weathers, to
make a likeness to him very flattering.’ Mary apologized in some
confusion. ‘She had not thought a strong Likeness at all
incompatible with very different degrees of Beauty.—There might
be resemblance in Countenance; and the complexion, and even
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
14
the features be very unlike.’ ‘I know nothing of my Brother’s
Beauty,’ said Emma, ‘for I have not seen him since he was seven
years old—but my father reckons us alike.’ ‘Mr. Watson!’—cried
Mr. Edwardes, ‘Well, you astonish me.—There is not the least
likeness in the world; Your brother’s eyes are grey, yours are
brown, he has a long face, and a wide mouth.—My dear, do you
perceive the least resemblance?’—‘Not the least.—Miss Emma
Watson puts me very much in mind of her eldest Sister, and
sometimes I see a look of Miss Penelope—and once or twice there
has been a glance of Mr. Robert—but I cannot perceive any
likeness to Mr. Samuel.’ ‘I see the likeness between her and Miss
Watson,’ replied Mr. E.—‘very strongly—but I am not sensible of
the others.—I do not much think she is like any of the Family but
Miss Watson; but I am very sure there is no resemblance between
her and Sam.’
This matter was settled, and they went to Dinner.—‘Your
Father, Miss Emma, is one of my oldest friends’—said Mr.
Edwardes, as he helped her to wine, when they were drawn round
the fire to enjoy their Desert,—‘We must drink to his better
health.—It is a great concern to me I assure you that he should be
such an Invalid.—I know nobody who likes a game of cards in a
social way, better than he does; and very few people that play a
fairer rubber.—It is a thousand pities that he should be so
deprived of the pleasure. For now we have a quiet little Whist club
that meets three times a week at the White Hart, and if he could
but have his health, how much he would enjoy it.’ ‘I dare say he
would Sir—and I wish with all my heart he were equal to it.’ ‘Your
Club would be better fitted for an Invalid,’ said Mrs. E. ‘if you did
not keep it up so late.’—This was an old grievance.—‘So late, my
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
15
dear, what are you talking of;’ cried the Husband with sturdy
pleasantry. ‘We are always at home before Midnight. They would
laugh at Osborne Castle to hear you call that late; they are but just
rising from dinner at midnight.’—‘That is nothing to the
purpose.’—retorted the Lady calmly. ‘The Osbornes are to be no
rule for us. You had better meet every night, and break up two
hours sooner.’ So far, the subject was very often carried;—but Mr.
and Mrs. Edwardes were so wise as never to pass that point; and
Mr. Edwardes now turned to something else.—He had lived long
enough in the Idleness of a Town to become a little of a Gossip,
and having some curiosity to know more of the Circumstances of
his young Guest than had yet reached him, he began with, ‘I think
Miss Emma, I remember your Aunt very well about thirty years
ago; I am pretty sure I danced with her in the old rooms at Bath,
the year before I married. She was a very fine woman then—but
like other people I suppose she is grown somewhat older since
that time.—I hope she is likely to be happy in her second choice.’
‘I hope so, I believe so, Sir’—said Emma in some agitation.—
‘Mr. Turner had not been dead a great while I think?’ ‘About two
years Sir.’ ‘I forget what her name is now?’—‘O’brien.’ ‘Irish! Ah! I
remember—and she is gone to settle in Ireland.—I do not wonder
that you should not wish to go with her into that Country Miss
Emma—but it must be a great deprivation to her, poor Lady!—
After bringing you up like a Child of her own.’—‘I was not so
ungrateful Sir,’ said Emma warmly, ‘as to wish to be any where
but with her.—It did not suit them, it did not suit Captain O’brien
that I should be of the party.’ ‘Captain!’—repeated Mrs. E. ‘the
Gentleman is in the army then?’ ‘Yes Ma’am.’—‘Aye—there is
nothing like your officers for captivating the Ladies, Young or
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
16
Old.—There is no resisting a Cockade my dear.’—‘I hope there
is.’—said Mrs. E. gravely, with a quick glance at her daughter;—
and Emma had just recovered from her own perturbation in time
to see a blush on Miss E.’s cheek, and in remembering what
Elizabeth had said of Captain Hunter, to wonder and waver
between his influence and her brother’s.
‘Elderly Ladies should be careful how they make a second
choice,’ observed Mr. Edwardes.—‘Carefulness—Discretion—
should not be confined to Elderly Ladies, or to a second choice’
added his wife. ‘It is quite as necessary to young Ladies in their
first.’—‘Rather more so, my dear’—replied he, ‘because young
Ladies are likely to feel the effects of it longer. When an old Lady
plays the fool, it is not in the course of nature that she should
suffer from it many years.’ Emma drew her hand across her eyes—
and Mrs. Edwardes on perceiving it, changed the subject to one of
less anxiety to all.
With nothing to do but to expect the hour of setting off, the
afternoon was long to the two young Ladies; and tho’ Miss
Edwardes was rather discomposed at the very early hour which
her mother always fixed for going, that early hour itself was
watched for with some eagerness.—The entrance of the Tea things
at seven o’clock was some relief—and luckily Mr. and Mrs.
Edwardes always drank a dish extraordinary, and ate an
additional muffin when they were going to sit up late, which
lengthened the ceremony almost to the wished for moment. At a
little before eight, the Tomlinsons carriage was heard to go by,
which was the constant signal for Mrs. Edwardes to order hers to
the door; and in a very few minutes, the party were transported
from the quiet warmth of a snug parlour, to the bustle, noise and
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
17
draughts of air of the broad Entrance-passage of an Inn.—Mrs.
Edwardes carefully guarding her own dress, while she attended
with yet greater Solicitude to the proper security of her young
Charges’ Shoulders and Throats, led the way up the wide
staircase, while no sound of a Ball but the first Scrape of one
violin, blessed the ears of her followers, and Miss Edwardes on
hazarding the anxious enquiry of whether there were many people
come yet was told by the Waiter as she knew she should, that ‘Mr.
Tomlinson’s family were in the room.’ In passing along a short
gallery to the Assembly-room, brilliant in lights before them, they
were accosted by a young Man in a morning dress and Boots, who
was standing in the doorway of a Bedchamber, apparently on
purpose to see them go by.—‘Ah! Mrs. E.—how do you do?—How
do you do Miss E.?—he cried, with an easy air;—‘You are
determined to be in good time I see, as usual.—The Candles are
but this moment lit.’—‘I like to get a good seat by the fire you
know, Mr. Musgrave,’ replied Mrs. E. ‘I am this moment going to
dress,’ said he—‘I am waiting for my stupid fellow.—We shall have
a famous Ball, The Osbornes are certainly coming; you may
depend upon that for I was with Lord Osborne this morning—’
The party passed on—Mrs. E’s sattin gown swept along the
clean floor of the Ball-room, to the fireplace at the upper end,
where one party only were formally seated, while three or four
Officers were lounging together, passing in and out from the
adjoining card-room.—A very stiff meeting between these near
neighbours ensued—and as soon as they were all duely placed
again, Emma in the low whisper which became the solemn scene,
said to Miss Edwardes, ‘The gentleman we passed in the passage,
was Mr. Musgrave, then?—He is reckoned remarkably agreable I
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
18
understand.’ Miss E. answered hesitatingly—‘Yes—he is very
much liked by many people.—But we are not very intimate.’—‘He
is rich, is not he?’—‘He has about 8 or 900£ a year I believe.—He
came into possession of it, when he was very young, and my
Father and Mother think it has given him rather an unsettled
turn.—He is no favourite with them.’—The cold and empty
appearance of the Room and the demure air of the small cluster of
Females at one end of it began soon to give way; the inspiriting
sound of other Carriages was heard, and continual accessions of
portly Chaperons, and strings of smartly-dressed girls were
received, with now and then a fresh gentleman straggler, who if
not enough in Love to station himself near any fair Creature
seemed glad to escape into the Card-room.—Among the increasing
numbers of Military Men, one now made his way to Miss Edwards,
with an air of Empressément, which decidedly said to her
Companion ‘I am Captain Hunter.’—and Emma, who could not
but watch her at such a moment, saw her looking rather
distressed, but by no means displeased, and heard an engagement
formed for the two first dances, which made her think her Brother
Sam’s a hopeless case.
Emma in the meanwhile was not unobserved, or unadmired
herself.—A new face and a very pretty one, could not be slighted—
her name was whispered from one party to another, and no sooner
had the signal been given, by the Orchestra’s striking up a
favourite air, which seemed to call the young Men to their duty,
and people the centre of the room, than she found herself engaged
to dance with a Brother officer, introduced by Captain Hunter.—
Emma Watson was not more than of the middle height—well
made and plump, with an air of healthy vigour.—Her skin was
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
19
very brown, but clear, smooth and glowing; which with a lively
Eye, a sweet smile, and an open Countenance, gave beauty to
attract, and expression to make that beauty improve on
acquaintance.—Having no reason to be dissatisfied with her
partner, the Evening began very pleasantly to her; and her
feelings perfectly coincided with the reiterated observation of
others, that it was an excellent Ball.—The two first dances were
not quite over, when the returning sound of Carriages after a long
interruption, called general notice, and ‘the Osbornes are coming,
the Osbornes are coming’—was repeated round the room.—After
some minutes of extraordinary bustle without, and watchful
curiosity within, the important Party, preceded by the attentive
Master of the Inn to open a door which was never shut, made their
appearance. They consisted of Lady Osborne, her son Lord
Osborne, her daughter Miss Osborne; Miss Carr, her daughter’s
friend, Mr. Howard formerly Tutor to Lord Osborne, now
Clergyman of the Parish in which the Castle stood, Mrs. Blake, a
widow-sister who lived with him, her son a fine boy of ten years
old, and Mr. Tom Musgrave; who probably imprisoned within his
own room, had been listening in bitter impatience to the sound of
the Music, for the last half hour. In their progress up the room,
they paused almost immediately behind Emma, to receive the
Compliments of some acquaintance, and she heard Lady Osborne
observe that they had made a point of coming early for the
gratification of Mrs. Blake’s little boy, who was uncommonly fond
of dancing.—Emma looked at them all is they passed—but chiefly
and with most interest on Tom Musgrave, who was certainly a
genteel, good looking young man.—Of the females, Lady Osborne
had by much the finest person;—tho’ nearly fifty, she was very
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
20
handsome, and had all the Dignity of Rank.
Lord Osborne was a very fine young man; but there was an air
of Coldness, of Carelessness, even of Awkwardness about him,
which seemed to speak him out of his Element in a Ball-room. He
came in fact only because it was judged expedient for him to
please the Borough—he was not fond of Women’s company, and
he never danced.—Mr. Howard was an agreable-looking Man, a
little more than Thirty.
At the conclusion of the two Dances, Emma found herself, she
knew not how, seated amongst the Osborne set; and she was
immediately struck with the fine Countenance and animated
gestures of the little boy, as he was standing before his Mother,
wondering when they should begin.—‘You will not be surprised at
Charles’s impatience,’ said Mrs. Blake, a lively pleasant-looking
little Woman of five- or six- and thirty, to a Lady who was standing
near her, ‘when you know what a partner he is to have. Miss
Osborne has been so very kind as to promise to dance the two first
dances with him.’—‘Oh! yes—we have been engaged this week,’
cried the boy, ‘and we are to dance down every couple.’—On the
other side of Emma, Miss Osborne, Miss Carr, and a party of
young Men were standing engaged in very lively consultation—
and soon afterwards she saw the smartest officer of the set,
walking off to the Orchestra to order the dance, while Miss
Osborne passing before her, to her little expecting Partner hastily
said—‘Charles, I beg your pardon for not keeping my engagement,
but I am going to dance these two dances with Colonel Beresford.
I know you will excuse me, and I will certainly dance with you
after Tea.’ And without staying for an answer, she turned again to
Miss Carr, and in another minute was led by Colonel Beresford to
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
21
begin the set. If the poor little boy’s face had in its happiness been
interesting to Emma, it was infinitely more so under this sudden
reverse;—he stood the picture of disappointment, with crimson’d
cheeks, quivering lips, and eyes bent on the floor. His mother,
stifling her own mortification, tried to sooth his, with the prospect
of Miss Osborne’s second promise;—but tho’ he contrived to utter
with an effort of Boyish Bravery ‘Oh! I do not mind it’—it was very
evident by the unceasing agitation of his features that he minded it
as much as ever.—Emma did not think, or reflect;—she felt and
acted. ‘I shall be very happy to dance with you Sir, if you like it,’
said she, holding out her hand with the most unaffected good
humour.—The Boy in one moment restored to all his first
delight—looked joyfully at his Mother and stepping forwards with
an honest and simple Thank you Ma’am was instantly ready to
attend his new acquaintance.—The Thankfulness of Mrs. Blake
was more diffuse;—with a look, most expressive of unexpected
pleasure, and lively Gratitude, she turned to her neighbour with
repeated and fervent acknowledgements of so great and
condescending a kindness to her boy.—Emma with perfect truth
could assure her that she could not be giving greater pleasure than
she felt herself—and Charles being provided with his gloves and
charged to keep them on, they joined the Set which was now
rapidly forming, with nearly equal complacency.—It was a
Partnership which could not be noticed without surprise. It gained
her a broad stare from Miss Osborne and Miss Carr as they passed
her in the dance. ‘Upon my word Charles you are in luck,’ (said the
former as she turned him) ‘you have got a better partner than
me’—to which the happy Charles answered ‘Yes.’—Tom Musgrave
who was dancing with Miss Carr, gave her many inquisitive
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
22
glances; and after a time Lord Osborne himself came under
pretence of talking to Charles, stood to look at his partner.—Tho’
rather distressed by such observation, Emma could not repent
what she had done, so happy had it made both the boy and his
Mother; the latter of whom was continually making opportunities
of addressing her with the warmest civility.—Her little partner she
found, tho’ bent chiefly on dancing, was not unwilling to speak,
when her questions or remarks gave him anything to say; and she
learnt, by a sort of inevitable enquiry that he had two brothers and
a sister, that they and their Mama all lived with his Uncle at
Wickstead, that his Uncle taught him Latin, that he was very fond
of riding, and had a horse of his own given him by Lord Osborne;
and that he had been out once already with Lord Osborne’s
Hounds.—At the end of these Dances Emma found they were to
drink tea;—Miss E. gave her a caution to be at hand, in a manner
which convinced her of Mrs. E.’s holding it very important to have
them both close to her when she moved into the Tearoom; and
Emma was accordingly on the alert to gain her proper station. It
was always the pleasure of the company to have a little bustle and
croud when they thus adjourned for refreshment;—the Tearoom
was a small room within the Cardroom, and in passing thro’ the
latter, where the passage was straightened by Tables, Mrs. E. and
her party were for a few moments hemmed in. It happened close
by Lady Osborne’s Cassino Table; Mr. Howard who belonged to it
spoke to his Nephew; and Emma on perceiving herself the object
of attention both to Lady O. and him, had just turned away her
eyes in time, to avoid seeming to hear her young companion
delightedly whisper aloud ‘Oh! Uncle, do look at my partner. She
is so pretty!’ As they were immediately in motion again however
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
23
Charles was hurried off without being able to receive his Uncle’s
suffrage. On entering the Tearoom, in which two long Tables were
prepared, Lord Osborne was to be seen quite alone at the end of
one, as if retreating as far as he could from the Ball, to enjoy his
own thoughts, and gape without restraint.—Charles instantly
pointed him out to Emma—‘There’s Lord Osborne—Let you and I
go and sit by him.’—‘No, no,’ said Emma laughing ‘you must sit
with my friends.’
Charles was now free enough to hazard a few questions in his
turn. ‘What o’clock was it?’—‘Eleven.’—‘Eleven!—And I am not at
all sleepy. Mama said I should be asleep before ten.—Do you think
Miss Osborne will keep her word with me, when Tea is over?’ ‘Oh!
yes.—I suppose so.’—tho’ she felt that she had no better reason to
give than that Miss Osborne had not kept it before.—‘When shall
you come to Osborne Castle?’—‘Never, probably.—I am not
acquainted with the family.’ ‘But you may come to Wickstead and
see Mama, and she can take you to the Castle.—There is a
monstrous curious stuff’d Fox there, and a Badger—anybody
would think they were alive. It is a pity you should not see
them.’—On rising from Tea, there was again a scramble for the
pleasure of being first out of the room, which happened to be
increased by one or two of the card parties having just broken up
and the players being disposed to move exactly the different way.
Among these was Mr. Howard—his sister leaning on his arm—and
no sooner were they within reach of Emma, than Mrs. B. calling
her notice by a friendly touch, said ‘Your goodness to Charles, my
dear Miss Watson, brings all his family upon you. Give me leave to
introduce my Brother—Mr. H.’ Emma curtsied, the gentleman
bowed—made a hasty request for the honour of her hand in the
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
24
next two dances, to which as hasty an affirmative was given, and
they were immediately impelled in opposite directions.—Emma
was very well pleased with the circumstance;—there was a quietly-
chearful, gentlemanlike air in Mr. H. which suited her—and in a
few minutes afterwards, the value of her Engagement increased,
when as she was sitting in the Card-room somewhat screened by a
door, she heard Lord Osborne, who was lounging on a vacant
Table near her, call Tom Musgrave towards him and say, ‘Why do
not you dance with that beautiful Emma Watson?—I want you to
dance with her—and I will come and stand by you.’—‘I was
determining on it this very moment my Lord, I’ll be introduced
and dance with her directly.’—‘Aye do—and if you find she does
not want much Talking to, you may introduce me by and bye.’—
‘Very well my Lord. If she is like her Sisters, she will only want to
be listened to.—I will go this moment. I shall find her in the Tea
room. That stiff old Mrs. E. has never done tea.’—Away he went—
Lord Osborne after him—and Emma lost no time in hurrying from
her corner, exactly the other way, forgetting in her haste that she
left Mrs. Edwardes behind.—‘We had quite lost you’—said Mrs.
E.—who followed her with Mary, in less than five minutes.—‘If you
prefer this room to the other, there is no reason why you should
not be here, but we had better all be together.’ Emma was saved
the Trouble of apologizing, by their being joined at the moment by
Tom Musgrave, who requesting Mrs. E. aloud to do him the
honour of presenting him to Miss Emma Watson, left that good
Lady without any choice in the business, but that of testifying by
the coldness of her manner that she did it unwillingly. The honour
of dancing with her, was solicited without loss of time—and
Emma, however she might like to be thought a beautiful girl by
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
25
Lord or Commoner, was so little disposed to favour Tom
Musgrave himself, that she had considerable satisfaction in
avowing her prior Engagement.—He was evidently surprised and
discomposed.—The stile of her last partner had probably led him
to believe her not overpowered with applications.—‘My little
friend Charles Blake,’ he cried, ‘must not expect to engross you
the whole evening. We can never suffer this—It is against the rules
of the Assembly—and I am sure it will never be patronised by our
good friend here Mrs. E.; She is by much too nice a judge of
Decorum to give her license to such a dangerous Particularity.’—‘I
am not going to dance with Master Blake Sir.’ The Gentleman a
little disconcerted, could only hope he might be more fortunate
another time—and seeming unwilling to leave her, tho’ his friend
Lord Osborne was waiting in the Doorway for the result, as Emma
with some amusement perceived—he began to make civil
enquiries after her family.—‘How comes it, that we have not the
pleasure of seeing your Sisters here this Evening?—Our
Assemblies have been used to be so well treated by them, that we
do not know how to take this neglect.’—‘My eldest Sister is the
only one at home—and she could not leave my Father.’—‘Miss
Watson the only one at home!—You astonish me!—It seems but
the day before yesterday that I saw them all three in this Town.
But I am afraid I have been a very sad neighbour of late. I hear
dreadful complaints of my negligence wherever I go, and I confess
it is a shameful length of time since I was at Stanton.—But I shall
now endeavour to make myself amends for the past.’—Emma’s
calm curtsey in reply must have struck him as very unlike the
encouraging warmth he had been used to receive from her Sisters,
and gave him probably the novel sensation of doubting his own
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
26
influence, and of wishing for more attention than she bestowed.
The dancing now recommenced; Miss Carr being impatient to call,
everybody was required to stand up—and Tom Musgrave’s
curiosity was appeased, on seeing Mr. Howard come forward and
claim Emma’s hand—‘That will do as well for me’—was Lord
Osborne’s remark, when his friend carried him the news—and he
was continually at Howard’s Elbow during the two dances.—The
frequency of his appearance there, was the only unpleasant part of
her engagement, the only objection she could make to Mr.
Howard.—In himself, she thought him as agreable as he looked;
tho’ chatting on the commonest topics he had a sensible,
unaffected, way of expressing himself, which made them all worth
hearing, and she only regretted that he had not been able to make
his pupil’s Manners as unexceptionable as his own.—The two
dances seemed very short, and she had her partner’s authority for
considering them so.—At their conclusion the Osbornes and their
Train were all on the move. ‘We are off at last,’ said his Lordship
to Tom—‘How much longer do you stay in this Heavenly place?—
till Sunrise?’—‘No faith! my Lord, I have had quite enough of it. I
assure you—I shall not shew myself here again when I have had
the honour of attending Lady Osborne to her Carriage. I shall
retreat in as much secrecy as possible to the most remote corner of
the House, where I shall order a Barrel of Oysters, and be
famously snug.’ ‘Let us see you soon at the Castle; and bring me
word how she looks by daylight.’—Emma and Mrs. Blake parted
as old acquaintance, and Charles shook her by the hand and
wished her ‘goodbye’ at least a dozen times. From Miss Osborne
and Miss Carr she received something like a jerking curtsey as
they passed her; even Lady Osborne gave her a look of
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
27
complacency—and his Lordship actually came back. after the
others were out of the room, to ‘beg her pardon’, and look in the
window seat behind her for the gloves which were visibly
compressed in his hand.
As Tom Musgrave was seen no more, we may suppose his plan
to have succeeded, and imagine him mortifying with his Barrel of
Oysters, in dreary solitude—or gladly assisting the Landlady in
her Bar to make fresh Negus for the happy Dancers above. Emma
could not help missing the party, by whom she had been, tho’ in
some respects unpleasantly, distinguished, and the two Dances
which followed and concluded the Ball, were rather flat, in
comparison with the others.—Mr. E. having play’d with good luck,
they were some of the last in the room.—‘Here we are, back again
I declare’—said Emma sorrowfully, as she walked into the Dining
room, where the Table was prepared, and the neat Upper maid
was lighting the Candles—‘My dear Miss Edwardes—how soon it
is at an end!—I wish it could all come over again!’ A great deal of
kind pleasure was expressed in her having enjoyed the Evening so
much—and Mr. Edwardes was as warm as herself, in praise of the
fullness, brilliancy and Spirit of the Meeting, tho’ as he had been
fixed the whole time at the same Table in the same Room, with
only one change of chairs, it might have seemed a matter scarcely
perceived.
But he had won four rubbers out of five, and everything went
well. His daughter felt the advantage of this gratified state of mind,
in the course of the remarks and retrospections which now
ensued, over the welcome soup.—‘How came you not to dance
with either of the Mr. Tomlinsons, Mary?’—said her Mother. ‘I was
always engaged when they asked me.’ ‘I thought you were to have
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
28
stood up with Mr. James, the last two dances; Mrs. Tomlinson told
me he was gone to ask you—and I had heard you say two minutes
before that you were not engaged.’—‘Yes—but—there was a
mistake—I had misunderstood—I did not know I was engaged.—I
thought it had been for the two Dances after, if we staid so long—
but Captain Hunter assured me it was for those very Two.’
‘So, you ended with Captain Hunter Mary, did you?’ said her
Father. ‘And who did you begin with?’ ‘Captain Hunter.’ was
repeated, in a very humble tone—‘Hum!—That is being constant
however. But who else did you dance with?’ ‘Mr. Norton, and Mr.
Styles.’ ‘And who are they?’ ‘Mr. Norton is a Cousin of Captain
Hunter’s.’—‘And who is Mr. Styles?’ ‘One of his particular
friends.’—‘All in the same Regiment’ added Mrs. E.—‘Mary was
surrounded by Red coats the whole Evening. I should have been
better pleased to see her dancing with some of our old Neighbours
I confess.’ ‘Yes, yes, we must not neglect our old Neighbours. But
if these soldiers are quicker than other people in a Ball-room,
what are young Ladies to do?’ ‘I think there is no occasion for
their engaging themselves so many Dances beforehand, Mr.
Edwards.’—‘No—perhaps not—but I remember my dear when
you and I did the same.’—Mrs. E. said no more, and Mary
breathed again.—A great deal of goodhumoured pleasantry
followed—and Emma went to bed in charming Spirits, her head
full of Osbornes, Blakes and Howards.
The next morning brought a great many visitors. It was the way
of the place always to call on Mrs. E. on the morning after a Ball,
and this neighbourly inclination was increased in the present
instance by a general spirit of curiosity on Emma’s account, as
everybody wanted to look again at the girl who had been admired
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
29
the night before by Lord Osborne.
Many were the eyes, and various the degrees of approbation
with which she was examined. Some saw no fault, and some no
Beauty. With some her brown skin was the annihilation of every
grace, and others could never be persuaded that she were half so
handsome as Elizabeth Watson had been ten years ago.—The
morning passed quietly away in discussing the merits of the Ball
with all this succession of Company—and Emma was at once
astonished by finding it Two o’clock, and considering that she had
heard nothing of her Father’s Chair. After this discovery she had
walked twice to the window to examine the Street, and was on the
point of asking leave to ring the bell and make enquiries, when the
light sound of a Carriage driving up to the door set her heart at
ease. She stepd again to the window—but instead of the
convenient but very un-smart Family Equipage perceived a neat
Curricle.—Mr. Musgrave was shortly afterwards announced;—and
Mrs. Edwardes put on her very stiffest look at the sound.—Not at
all dismayed however by her chilling air, he paid his Compliments
to each of the Ladies with no unbecoming Ease, and continuing to
address Emma, presented her a note, which he had the honour of
bringing from her Sister; But to which he must observe that a
verbal postscript from himself would be requisite.’
The note, which Emma was beginning to read rather before
Mrs. Edwardes had entreated her to use no ceremony, contained a
few lines from Elizabeth importing that their Father in
consequence of being unusually well had taken the sudden
resolution of attending the Visitation that day, and that as his
Road lay quite wide from R., it was impossible for her to come
home till the following morning, unless the Edwardes would send
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
30
her which was hardly to be expected, or she could meet with any
chance conveyance, or did not mind walking so far.—She had
scarcely run her eye thro’ the whole, before she found herself
obliged to listen to Tom Musgrave’s farther account. ‘I received
that note from the fair hands of Miss Watson only ten minutes
ago,’ said he—‘I met her in the village of Stanton, whither my good
Stars prompted me to turn my Horses heads—she was at that
moment in quest of a person to employ on the Errand, and I was
fortunate enough to convince her that she could not find a more
willing or speedy Messenger than myself. Remember, I say
nothing of my Disinterestedness.—My reward is to be the
indulgence of conveying you to Stanton in my Curricle.—Tho’ they
are not written down, I bring your Sister’s Orders for the same.’
Emma felt distressed; she did not like the proposal—she did not
wish to be on terms of intimacy with the Proposer—and yet fearful
of encroaching on the Edwardes, as well as wishing to go home
herself, she was at a loss how entirely to decline what he offered—
Mrs. E. continued silent, either not understanding the case, or
waiting to see how the young Lady’s inclination lay. Emma
thanked him—but professed herself very unwilling to give him so
much trouble. ‘The Trouble was of course, Honour, Pleasure,
Delight. What had he or his Horses to do?’—Still she hesitated.
‘She believed she must beg leave to decline his assistance—she
was rather afraid of the sort of carriage—. The distance was not
beyond a walk.’ Mrs. E. was silent no longer. She enquired into the
particulars—and then said ‘We shall be extremely happy Miss
Emma, if you can give us the pleasure of your company till
tomorrow—but if you can not conveniently do so, our Carriage is
quite at your Service, and Mary will be pleased with the
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
31
opportunity of seeing your Sister.’—This was precisely what
Emma had longed for; and she accepted the offer most thankfully;
acknowledging that as Elizabeth was entirely alone, it was her
wish to return home to dinner.—The plan was warmly opposed by
their Visitor. ‘I cannot suffer it indeed. I must not be deprived of
the happiness of escorting you. I assure you there is not a
possibility of fear with my Horses. You might guide them yourself.
Your Sisters all know how quiet they are; They have none of them
the smallest scruple in trusting themselves with me, even on a
Race Course.—Believe me’—added he lowering his voice—‘You
are quite safe, the danger is only mine.’—Emma was not more
disposed to oblige him for all this.—‘And as to Mrs. Edwardes’
carriage being used the day after a Ball, it is a thing quite out of
rule I assure you—never heard of before—the old Coachman will
look as black as his Horses. Won’t he Miss Edwardes?’—No notice
was taken. The Ladies were silently firm, and the gentleman found
himself obliged to submit.
‘What a famous Ball we had last night!’—he cried, after a short
pause. ‘How long did you keep it up, after the Osbornes and I went
away?’—‘We had two dances more.’—‘It is making it too much of a
fatigue I think, to stay so late.—I suppose your Set was not a very
full one.’—‘Yes, quite as full as ever, except the Osbornes. There
seemed no vacancy anywhere—and everybody danced with
uncommon spirit to the very last.’—Emma said this—tho’ against
her conscience.—‘Indeed! perhaps I might have looked in upon
you again, if I had been aware of as much;—for I am rather fond of
dancing than not.—Miss Osborne is a charming girl, is not she?’ ‘I
do not think her handsome,’ replied Emma, to whom all this was
chiefly addressed. ‘Perhaps she is not critically handsome, but her
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
32
Manners are delightful. And Fanny Carr is a most interesting little
creature. You can imagine nothing more naive or piquante; and
What do you thing of Lord Osborne Miss Watson?’ ‘That he would
be handsome, even tho’ he were not a Lord—and perhaps—better
bred; More desirous of pleasing, and shewing himself pleased in a
right place.’ ‘Upon my word, you are severe upon my friend!—I
assure you Lord Osborne is a very good fellow.’ ‘I do not dispute
his virtues—but I do not like his careless air.’ ‘If it were not a
breach of confidence,’ replied Tom with an important look,
‘perhaps I might be able to win a more favourable opinion of poor
Osborne.’ Emma gave him no Encouragement, and he was obliged
to keep his friend’s secret.—He was also obliged to put an end to
his visit—for Mrs. Edwardes having ordered her Carriage, there
was no time to be lost on Emma’s side in preparing for it.—Miss
Edwards accompanied her home, but as it was Dinner hour at
Stanton, staid with them only a few minutes,—‘Now my dear
Emma, said Miss W., as soon as they were alone, you must talk to
me all the rest of the day, without stopping, or I shall not be
satisfied. But first of all Nanny shall bring in the dinner. Poor
thing!—You will not dine as you did yesterday, for we have
nothing but some fried beef.—How nice Mary Edwards looks in
her new pelisse!—And now tell me how you like them all, and
what I am to say to Sam. I have begun my letter, Jack Stokes is to
call for it to-morrow, for his Uncle is going within a mile of
Guilford the next day.’ Nanny brought in the dinner;—‘We will
wait upon ourselves,’ continued Elizabeth ‘and then we shall lose
no time.—And so, you would not come home with Tom
Musgrave?’—‘No. You had said so much against him that I could
not wish either for the obligation, or the Intimacy which the use of
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
33
his Carriage must have created. I should not even have liked the
appearance of it. ‘You did very right; tho’ I wonder at your
forbearance, and I do not think I could have done it myself.—He
seemed so eager to fetch you, that I could not say no, tho’ it rather
went against me to be throwing you together, so well as I knew his
Tricks;—but I did long to see you, and it was a clever way of
getting you home; Besides it won’t do to be too nice.—Nobody
could have thought of the Edwardes’ letting you have their
Coach,—after the Horses being out so late.—But what am I to say
to Sam?’—‘If you are guided by me, you will not encourage him to
think of Miss Edwards.—The Father is decidedly against him, the
Mother shews him no favour, and I doubt his having any interest
with Mary. She danced twice with Captain Hunter, and I think
shews him in general as much Encouragement as is consistent
with her disposition, and the circumstances she is placed in.—She
once mentioned Sam, and certainly with a little confusion—but
that was perhaps merely oweing to the consciousness of his liking
her, which may very probably have come to her knowledge.’—‘Oh!
dear Yes—she has heard enough of that from us all. Poor Sam!—
He is out of luck as well as other people.—For the life of me
Emma, I cannot help feeling for those that are cross’d in Love.—
Well now begin, and give me an account of everything as it
happened.’ Emma obeyed her—and Elizabeth listened with very
little interruption till she heard of Mr. H. as a partner.—‘Dance
with Mr. H.—Good Heavens! You don’t say so! Why—he is quite
one of the great and Grand ones;—Did not you find him very
high?’ ‘His manners are of a kind to give me much more Ease and
confidence than Tom Musgrave’s.’ ‘Well—go on. I should have
been frightened out of my wits, to have had anything to do with
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
34
the Osborne’s set.’—Emma concluded her narration.—‘And so,
you really did not dance with Tom M. at all?—But you must have
liked him, you must have been struck with him altogether.’—‘I do
not like him, Elizabeth. I allow his person and air to be good—and
that his manners to a certain point—his address rather—is
pleasing.—But I see nothing else to admire in him.—On the
contrary, he seems very vain, very conceited, absurdly anxious for
Distinction, and absolutely contemptible in some of the measures
he takes for becoming so.—There is a ridiculousness about him
that entertains me—but his company gives me no other agreable
Emotion.’ ‘My dearest Emma!—You are like nobody else in the
World.—It is well Margaret is not by.—You do not offend me, tho’ I
hardly know how to believe you. But Margaret would never
forgive such words.’ ‘I wish Margaret could have heard him
profess his ignorance of her being out of the Country; he declared
it seemed only two days since he had seen her.’ ‘Aye—that is just
like him. And yet this is the Man, she will fancy so desperately in
love with her.—He is no favourite of mine, as you well know,
Emma;—but you must think him agreable. Can you lay your hand
on your heart, and say you do not?’—‘Indeed I can, Both Hands;
and spread to their widest extent.’—‘I should like to know the Man
you do think agreable.’ ‘His name is Howard.’ ‘Howard! Dear me. I
cannot think of him, but as playing cards with Lady Osborne, and
looking proud.—I must own however that it is a relief to me, to
find you can speak as you do, of Tom Musgrave; my heart did
misgive me that you would like him too well. You talked so stoutly
beforehand, that I was sadly afraid your Brag would be
punished.—I only hope it will last;—and that he will not come on
to pay you much attention; it is a hard thing for a woman to stand
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
35
against the flattering ways of a Man, when he is bent upon
pleasing her.’ As their quietly sociable little meal concluded, Miss
Watson could not help observing how comfortably it had passed. It
is so delightful to me,’ said she, ‘to have Things going on in peace
and goodhumour. Nobody can tell how much I hate quarrelling.
Now, tho’ we have had nothing but fried beef, how good it has all
seemed.—I wish everybody were as easily satisfied as you—but
poor Margaret is very snappish, and Penelope owns she had
rather have Quarrelling going on, than nothing at all.’—Mr.
Watson returned in the Evening, not the worse for the exertion of
the day, and consequently pleased with what he had done, and
glad to talk of it, over his own Fireside.
Emma had not foreseen any interest to herself in the
occurrences of a Visitation—but when she heard Mr. Howard
spoken of as the Preacher, and as having given them an excellent
Sermon, she could not help listening with a quicker Ear.—‘I do not
know when I have heard a Discourse more to my mind’—
continued Mr. W.—‘or one better delivered.—He reads extremely
well, with great propriety and in a very impressive manner; and at
the same time without any Theatrical grimace or violence.—I own,
I do not like much action in the pulpit—I do not like the studied
air and artificial inflexions of voice, which your very popular and
most admired Preachers generally have.—A simple delivery is
much better calculated to inspire Devotion, and shews a much
better Taste.—Mr. H. read like a scholar and a gentleman.’—‘And
what had you for dinner Sir?’—said his eldest Daughter.—He
related the Dishes and told what he had ate himself. ‘Upon the
whole,’ he added, ‘I have had a very comfortable day; my old
friends were quite surprised to see me amongst them—and I must
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
36
say that everybody paid me great attention, and seemed to feel for
me as an Invalid.—They would make me sit near the fire, and as
the partridges were pretty high, Dr. Richards would have them
sent away to the other end of the Table, that they might not offend
Mr. Watson—which I thought very kind of him.—But what pleased
me as much as anything was Mr. Howard’s attention;—There is a
pretty steep flight of steps up to the room we dine in—which do
not quite agree with my gouty foot—and Mr. Howard walked by
me from the bottom to the top, and would make me take his
arm.—It struck me as very becoming in so young a Man, but I am
sure I had no claim to expect it; for I never saw him before in my
Life.—By the bye, he enquired after one of my Daughters, but I do
not know which. I suppose you know among yourselves.’
——————
On the third day after the Ball, as Nanny at five minutes before
three, was beginning to bustle into the parlour with the Tray and
the Knife-case, she was suddenly called to the front door, by the
sound of as smart a rap as the end of a riding-whip could give—
and tho’ charged by Miss W. to let nobody in, returned in half a
minute, with a look of awkward dismay, to hold the parlour door
open for Lord Osborne and Tom Musgrave.—The surprise of the
young Ladies may be imagined. No visitors would have been
welcome at such a moment; but such visitors as these—such a one
as Lord Osborne at least, a noble man and a stranger, was really
distressing.—He looked a little embarrassed himself,—as, on being
introduced by his easy, voluble friend, he muttered something of
doing himself the honour of waiting on Mr. Watson.—Tho’ Emma
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
37
could not but take the compliment of the visit to herself, she was
very far from enjoying it. She felt all the inconsistency of such an
acquaintance with the very humble stile in which they were
obliged to live; and having in her Aunt’s family been used to many
of the Elegancies of Life, was fully sensible of all that must be open
to the ridicule of Richer people in her present home.—Of the pain
of such feelings, Elizabeth knew very little;—her simpler Mind, or
juster reason saved her from such mortification—and tho’
shrinking under a general sense of Inferiority, she felt no
particular Shame.—Mr. Watson, as the Gentlemen had already
heard from Nanny, was not well enough to be down stairs;—With
much concern they took their seats—Lord Osborne near Emma,
and the convenient Mr. Musgrave in high spirits at his own
importance, on the other side of the fireplace with Elizabeth.—He
was at no loss for words;—but when Lord Osborne had hoped that
Emma had not caught cold at the Ball, he had nothing more to say
for some time, and could only gratify his Eye by occasional glances
at his fair neighbour.—Emma was not inclined to give herself
much trouble for his Entertainment—and after hard labour of
mind, he produced the remark of its being a very fine day, and
followed it up with the question of, ‘Have you been walking this
morning?’ ‘No, my Lord. We thought it too dirty.’ ‘You should
wear half-boots.’—After another pause, ‘Nothing sets off a neat
ankle more than a half-boot; nankin galoshed with black looks
very well.—Do not you like Half-boots?’ ‘Yes—but unless they are
so stout as to injure their beauty, they are not fit for Country
walking.’—‘Ladies should ride in dirty weather.—Do you ride?’
‘No my Lord.’ ‘I wonder every Lady does not.—A woman never
looks better than on horseback.’ ‘But every woman may not have
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
38
the inclination, or the means.’ ‘If they knew how much it became
them, they would all have the inclination, and I fancy Miss
Watson—when once they had the inclination, the means would
soon follow.’—‘Your Lordship thinks we always have our own
way.—That is a point on which Ladies and Gentlemen have long
disagreed—But without pretending to decide it, I may say that
there are some circumstances which even Women cannot
controul.—Female Economy will do a great deal my Lord, but it
cannot turn a small income into a large one.’—Lord Osborne was
silenced. Her manner had been neither sententious nor sarcastic,
but there was a something in its mild seriousness, as well as in the
words themselves which made his Lordship think;—and when he
addressed her again, it was with a degree of considerate propriety,
totally unlike the half-awkward, half-fearless stile of his former
remarks.—It was a new thing with him to wish to please a woman;
it was the first time that he had ever felt what was due to a woman,
in Emma’s situation.—But as he wanted neither Sense nor a good
disposition, he did not feel it without effect.—‘You have not been
long in this Country I understand,’ said he in the tone of a
Gentleman. ‘I hope you are pleased with it.’—He was rewarded by
a gracious answer, and a more liberal full view of her face than she
had yet bestowed. Unused to exert himself, and happy in
contemplating her, he then sat in silence for some minutes longer,
while Tom Musgrave was chattering to Elizabeth, till they were
interrupted by Nanny’s approach, who half opening the door and
putting in her head, said ‘Please Ma’am, Master wants to know
why he be’nt to have his dinner.’—The Gentlemen, who had
hitherto disregarded every symptom, however positive, of the
nearness of that Meal, now jumped up with apologies, while
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
39
Elizabeth called briskly after Nanny ‘to tell Betty to take up the
Fowls.’—‘I am sorry it happens so’—she added, turning good-
humouredly towards Musgrave—‘but you know what early hours
we keep.’ Tom had nothing to say for himself, he knew it very well,
and such honest simplicity, such shameless Truth rather
bewildered him.—Lord Osborne’s parting Compliments took some
time, his inclination for speech seeming to increase with the
shortness of the term for indulgence.—He recommended Exercise
in defiance of dirt—spoke again in praise of Half-boots—begged
that his Sister might be allow’d to send Emma the name of her
Shoemaker—and concluded with saying, ‘My Hounds will be
hunting this Country next week—I believe they will throw off at
Stanton Wood on Wednesday at 9 o’clock.—I mention this, in
hopes of your being drawn out to see what’s going on.—If the
morning’s tolerable, pray do us the honour of giving us your good
wishes in person.’
The Sisters looked on each other with astonishment, when their
Visitors had withdrawn. ‘Here’s an unaccountable Honour!’ cried
Elizabeth at last. ‘Who would have thought of Lord Osborne’s
coming to Stanton.—He is very handsome—but Tom Musgrave
looks all to nothing, the smartest and most fashionable Man of the
two. I am glad he did not say anything to me; I would not have had
to talk to such a great Man for the world. Tom was very agreable,
was not he?—But did you hear him ask where Miss Penelope and
Miss Margaret were, when he first came in?—It put me out of
patience.—I am glad Nanny had not laid the Cloth however, it
would have looked so awkward;—just the Tray did not signify.’ To
say that Emma was not flattered by Lord Osborne’s visit, would be
to assert a very unlikely thing, and describe a very odd young
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
40
Lady; but the gratification was by no means unalloyed; His coming
was a sort of notice which might please her vanity, but did not suit
her pride, and she would rather have known that he wished the
visit without presuming to make it, than have seen him at
Stanton.—Among other unsatisfactory feelings it once occurred to
her to wonder why Mr. Howard had not taken the same privilege
of coming, and accompanied his Lordship—but she was willing to
suppose that he had either known nothing about it, or had
declined any share in a measure which carried quite as much
Impertinence in its form as Goodbreeding.—Mr. W. was very far
from being delighted, when he heard what had passed;—a little
peevish under immediate pain, and ill disposed to be pleased, he
only replied—‘Phoo! Phoo!—What occasion could there be for
Lord O.’s coming. I have lived here fourteen years without being
noticed by any of the family. It is some foolery of that idle fellow T.
Musgrave. I cannot return the visit.—I would not if I could.’ And
when T. Musgrave was met with again, he was commissioned with
a message of excuse to Osborne Castle, on the too-sufficient plea of
Mr. Watson’s infirm state of health.
A week or ten days rolled quietly away after this visit, before
any new bustle arose to interrupt even for half a day, the tranquil
and affectionate intercourse of the two Sisters, whose mutual
regard was increasing with the intimate knowledge of each other
which such intercourse produced.—The first circumstance to
break in on this serenity, was the receipt of a letter from Croydon
to announce the speedy return of Margaret, and a visit of two or
three days from Mr. and Mrs. Robert Watson, who undertook to
bring her home and wished to see their Sister Emma.—It was an
expectation to fill the thoughts of the Sisters at Stanton, and to
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
41
busy the hours of one of them at least—for as Jane had been a
woman of fortune, the preparations for her entertainment were
considerable, and as Elizabeth had at all times more good will
than method in her guidance of the house, she could make no
change without a Bustle.—An absence of fourteen years had made
all her Brothers and Sisters Strangers to Emma, but in her
expectation of Margaret there was more than the awkwardness of
such an alienation; she had heard things which made her dread
her return; and the day which brought the party to Stanton
seemed to her the probable conclusion of almost all that had been
comfortable in the house.—Robert Watson was an Attorney at
Croydon, in a good way of Business; very well satisfied with
himself for the same, and for having married the only daughter of
the Attorney to whom he had been Clerk, with a fortune of six
thousand pounds.—Mrs. Robert was not less pleased with herself
for having had that six thousand pounds, and for being now in
possession of a very smart house in Croydon, where she gave
genteel parties, and wore fine cloathes.—In her person there was
nothing remarkable; her manners were pert and conceited.—
Margaret was not without beauty; she had a slight, pretty figure,
and rather wanted Countenance than good features;—but the
sharp and anxious expression of her face made her beauty in
general little felt.—On meeting her long-absent Sister, as on every
occasion of shew, her manner was all affection and her voice all
gentleness; continual smiles and a very slow articulation being her
constant resource when determined on pleasing.
She was now so ‘delighted to see dear, dear Emma’ that she
could hardly speak a word in a minute.—‘I am sure we shall be
great friends’—she observed, with much sentiment, as they were
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
42
sitting together.—Emma scarcely knew how to answer such a
proposition—and the manner in which it was spoken, she could
not attempt to equal. Mrs. R. W. eyed her with much familiar
curiosity and Triumphant Compassion;—the loss of the Aunt’s
fortune was uppermost in her mind, at the moment of meeting;—
and she could not but feel how much better it was to be the
daughter of a gentleman of property in Croydon, than the niece of
an old woman who threw herself away on an Irish Captain.—
Robert was carelessly kind, as became a prosperous Man and a
brother; more intent on settling with the Post-Boy, inveighing
against the Exorbitant advance in Posting, and pondering over a
doubtful halfcrown, than on welcoming a Sister, who was no
longer likely to have any property for him to get the direction of.—
‘Your road through the village is infamous, Elizabeth;’ said he,
‘worse than ever it was. By Heaven! I would endite it if I lived near
you. Who is Surveyor now?’—There was a little niece at Croydon,
to be fondly enquired after by the kind-hearted Elizabeth, who
regretted very much her not being of the party.—‘You are very
good’—replied her Mother—‘and I assure you it went very hard
with Augusta to have us come away without her. I was forced to
say we were only going to Church and promise to come back for
her directly.—But you know it would not do, to bring her without
her maid, and I am as particular as ever in having her properly
attended to.’ ‘Sweet little Darling!’—cried Margaret—‘It quite
broke my heart to leave her.’ ‘Then why was you in such a hurry to
run away from her?’ cried Mrs. R.—‘You are a sad shabby girl.—I
have been quarrelling with you all the way we came, have not I?—
Such a visit as this, I never heard of!—You know how glad we are
to have any of you with us—if it be for months together.—And I
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
43
am sorry, (with a witty smile) we have not been able to make
Croydon agreable this autumn.’—‘My dearest Jane—do not
overpower me with your Raillery.—You know what inducements I
had to bring me home,—spare me, I entreat you. I am no match
for your arch sallies.’ ‘Well, I only beg you will not set your
Neighbours against the place.—Perhaps Emma may be tempted to
go back with us, and stay till Christmas, if you don’t put in your
word.’—Emma was greatly obliged. ‘I assure you we have very
good society at Croydon.—I do not much attend the Balls, they are
rather too mixed,—but our parties are very select and good.—I
had seven Tables last week in my Drawingroom. Are you fond of
the Country? How do you like Stanton?’—‘Very much’—replied
Emma, who thought a comprehensive answer, most to the
purpose.—She saw that her Sister-in-law despised her
immediately.—Mrs. R. W. was indeed wondering what sort of a
home Emma could possibly have been used to in Shropshire, and
setting it down as certain that the Aunt could never have had six
thousand pounds.—‘How charming Emma is!—’ whispered
Margaret to Mrs. Robert in her most languishing tone.—Emma
was quite distress’d by such behaviour;—and she did not like it
better when she heard Margaret five minutes afterwards say to
Elizabeth in a sharp quick accent, totally unlike the first—‘Have
you heard from Pen. since she went to Chichester?—I had a letter
the other day.—I don’t find she is likely to make anything of it. I
fancy she’ll come back “Miss Penelope” as she went.’
Such, she feared would be Margaret’s common voice, when the
novelty of her own appearance were over; the tone of artificial
Sensibility was not recommended by the idea.—The Ladies were
invited upstairs to prepare for dinner. ‘I hope you will find things
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
44
tolerably comfortable Jane’—said Elizabeth as she opened the
door of the spare bedchamber.—‘My good creature,’ replied Jane,
‘use no ceremony with me, I intreat you. I am one of those who
always take things as they find them. I hope I can put up with a
small apartment for two or three nights, without making a piece of
work. I always wish to be treated quite “en famille” when I come
to see you—and now I do hope you have not been getting a great
dinner for us.—Remember we never eat suppers.’—‘I suppose,’
said Margaret rather quickly to Emma, ‘you and I are to be
together; Elizabeth always takes care to have a room to herself.’—
‘No—Elizabeth gives me half her’s.’—‘Oh I’—(in a soften’d voice,
and rather mortified to find she was not ill used) ‘I am sorry I am
not to have the pleasure of your company—especially as it makes
me nervous to be much alone.’
Emma was the first of the females in the parlour again; on
entering it she found her brother alone.—‘So Emma,’ said he, ‘you
are quite the Stranger at home. It must seem odd enough to you to
be here.—A pretty piece of work your Aunt Turner has made of
it!—By Heaven! A woman should never be trusted with money. I
always said she ought to have settled something on you, as soon as
her Husband died.’ ‘But that would have been trusting me with
money,’ replied Emma, ‘and I am a woman too.—’ ‘It might have
been secured to your future use, without your having any power
over it now.—What a blow it must have been upon you!—To find
yourself, instead of heiress of 8 or 9000£, sent back a weight upon
your family, without a sixpence.—I hope the old woman will smart
for it.’ ‘Do not speak disrespectfully of her—She was very good to
me; and if she has made an imprudent choice, she will suffer more
from it herself; than I can possibly do.’ ‘I do not mean to distress
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
45
you, but you know every body must think her an old fool.—I
thought Turner had been reckoned an extraordinary sensible,
clever man.—How the Devil came he to make such a will?’—‘My
Uncle’s sense is not at all impeached in my opinion, by his
attachment to my Aunt. She had been an excellent wife to him.
The most Liberal and enlightened Minds are always the most
confiding.—The event has been unfortunate, but my Uncle’s
memory is if possible endeared to me by such a proof of tender
respect for my Aunt.’—‘That’s odd sort of Talking!—He might
have provided decently for his widow, without leaving every thing
that he had to dispose of, or any part of it at her mercy.’—‘My
Aunt may have erred’—said Emma warmly—‘she has erred—but
my Uncle’s conduct was faultless. I was her own Niece, and he left
to herself the power and the pleasure of providing for me.—‘But
unluckily she has left the pleasure of providing for you, to your
Father, and without the power.—That’s the long and the short of
the business. After keeping you at a distance from your family for
such a length of time as must do away all natural affection among
us and breeding you up (I suppose) in a superior stile, you are
returned upon their hands without a sixpence.’ ‘You know,’
replied Emma struggling with her tears, ‘my Uncle’s melancholy
state of health.—He was a greater Invalid than my father. He could
not leave home.’ ‘I do not mean to make you cry.’—said Robert
rather softened—and after a short silence, by way of changing the
subject, he added—‘I am just come from my Father’s room, he
seems very indifferent. It will be a sad break-up when he dies.
Pity, you can none of you get married!—You must come to
Croydon as well as the rest, and see what you can do there.—I
believe if Margaret had had a thousand or fifteen hundred pounds,
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
46
there was a young man who would have thought of her.’ Emma
was glad when they were joined by the others; it was better to look
at her Sister-in-law’s finery than listen to Robert, who had equally
irritated and grieved her.—Mrs. Robert exactly as smart as she
had been at her own party, came in with apologies for her dress—
‘I would not make you wait,’ said she, ‘so I put on the first thing I
met with.—I am afraid I am a sad figure.—My dear Mr. W.—(to
her husband) you have not put any fresh powder in your hair.’—
‘No—I do not intend it.—I think there is powder enough in my
hair for my wife and sisters.’ ‘Indeed you ought to make some
alteration in your dress before dinner when you are out visiting,
tho’ you do not at home.’ ‘Nonsense.’—‘It is very odd you should
not like to do what other gentlemen do. Mr. Marshall and Mr.
Hemmings change their dress every day of their Lives before
dinner. And what was the use of my putting up your last new Coat,
if you are never to wear it.’—‘Do be satisfied with being fine
yourself, and leave your husband alone.’—To put an end to this
altercation, and soften the evident vexation of her sister-in-law,
Emma (tho’ in no Spirits to make such nonsense easy) began to
admire her gown.—It produced immediate complacency.—‘Do you
like it?’—said she.—‘I am very happy.—It has been excessively
admired;—but sometimes I think the pattern too large.—I shall
wear one tomorrow that I think you will prefer to this.—Have you
seen the one I gave Margaret?’
Dinner came, and except when Mrs. R. looked at her husband’s
head, she continued gay and flippant, chiding Elizabeth for the
profusion on the Table, and absolutely protesting against the
entrance of the roast Turkey—which formed the only exception to
‘You see your dinner’.—‘I do beg and entreat that no Turkey may
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
47
be seen to-day. I am really frightened out of my wits with the
number of dishes we have already. Let us have no Turkey I
beseech you.’ ‘My dear,’ replied Elizabeth ‘the Turkey is roasted,
and it may just as well come in, as stay in the Kitchen. Besides if it
is cut, I am in hopes my Father may be tempted to eat a bit, for it
is rather a favourite dish.’ ‘You may have it in my dear, but I
assure you I shan’t touch it.’
Mr. Watson had not been well enough to join the party at
dinner, but was prevailed on to come down and drink tea with
them.—‘I wish we may be able to have a game of cards tonight,’
said Elizabeth to Mrs. R. after seeing her rather comfortably
seated in his arm chair. ‘Not on my account my dear, I beg. You
know I am no card player. I think a snug chat infinitely better. I
always say cards are very well sometimes, to break a formal circle,
but one never wants them among friends.’ ‘I was thinking of its
being something to amuse my father,’ answered Elizabeth—‘if it
was not disagreable to you. He says his head won’t bear Whist—
but perhaps if we make a round game he may be tempted to sit
down with us.’—‘By all means my dear Creature. I am quite at
your service. Only do not oblige me to chuse the game, that’s all.
Speculation is the only round game at Croydon now, but I can play
anything.—When there is only one or two of you at home, you
must be quite at a loss to amuse him—why do not you get him to
play at Cribbage?—Margaret and I have played at Cribbage, most
nights that we have not been engaged.’—A sound like a distant
Carriage was at this moment caught; everybody listened; it
became more decided; it certainly drew nearer.—It was an
unusual sound in Stanton at any time of the day, for the Village
was on no very public road, and contained no gentleman’s family
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
48
but the Rector’s.—The wheels rapidly approached;—in two
minutes the general expectation was answered; they stopped
beyond a doubt at the garden gate of the Parsonage. ‘Who could it
be?—it was certainly a postchaise.—Penelope was the only
creature to be thought of. She might perhaps have met with some
unexpected opportunity of returning.’—A pause of suspense
ensued.—Steps were distinguished, first along the paved Footway
which led under the windows of the house to the front door, and
then within the passage. They were the steps of a Man. It could
not be Penelope. It must be Samuel.—The door opened, and
displayed Tom Musgrave in the wrap of a Travellor.—He had been
in London and was now on his way home, and he had come half a
mile out of his road merely to call for ten minutes at Stanton. He
loved to take people by surprise, with sudden visits at
extraordinary seasons; and in the present instance had had the
additional motive of being able to tell the Miss Watsons, whom he
depended on finding sitting quietly employed after tea, that he
was going home to an 8 o’clock dinner.—As it happened however,
he did not give more surprise than he received, when instead of
being shewn into the usual little sitting room, the door of the best
parlour a foot larger each way than the other was thrown open,
and he beheld a circle of smart people whom he could not
immediately recognise arranged with all the honours of visiting
round the fire, and Miss Watson sitting at the best Pembroke
Table, with the best Tea things before her. He stood for a few
seconds, in silent amazement.—‘Musgrave!’—ejaculated Margaret
in a tender voice.—He recollected himself, and came forward,
delighted to find such a circle of Friends, and blessing his good
fortune for the unlooked-for Indulgence.—He shook hands with
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
49
Robert, bowed and smiled to the Ladies, and did everything very
prettily; but as to any particularity of address or Emotion towards
Margaret, Emma who closely observed him, perceived nothing
that did not justify Elizabeth’s opinions tho’ Margaret’s modest
smiles imported that she meant to take the visit to herself.—He
was persuaded without much difficulty to throw off his greatcoat,
and drink tea with them. ‘For whether he dined at 8 or 9, as he
observed, was a matter of very little consequence.’—and without
seeming to seek, he did not turn away from the chair close to
Margaret which she was assiduous in providing him.—She had
thus secured him from her Sisters—but it was not immediately in
her power to preserve him from her Brother’s claims, for as he
came avowedly from London, and had left it only four hours ago,
the last current report as to public news, and the general opinion
of the day must be understood, before Robert could let his
attention be yielded to the less national, and important demands
of the Women.—At last however he was at liberty to hear
Margaret’s soft address, as she spoke her fears of his having had a
most terrible, cold, dark dreadful Journey.—‘Indeed you should
not have set out so late.’ ‘I could not be earlier,’ he replied. ‘I was
detained chatting at the Bedford, by a friend.—All hours are alike
to me.—How long have you been in the Country Miss
Margaret?’—‘We came only this morning.—My kind Brother and
Sister brought me home this very morning.—’Tis singular is not
it?’ ‘You were gone a great while, were not you? a fortnight I
suppose?’—‘You may call a fortnight a great while Mr. Musgrave,’
said Mrs. Robert smartly—‘but we think a month very little. I
assure you we bring her home at the end of a month, much against
our will.’ ‘A month! have you really been gone a month! ’tis
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
50
amazing how Time flies.’ ‘You may imagine,’ said Margaret in a
sort of Whisper, ‘what are my Sensations in finding myself once
more at Stanton. You know what a sad visitor I make.—And I was
so excessively impatient to see Emma;—I dreaded the meeting,
and at the same time longed for it.—Do you not comprehend the
sort of feeling?’—‘Not at all,’ cried he aloud. ‘I could never dread a
meeting with Miss Emma Watson,—or any of her Sisters.’ It was
lucky that he added that finish.—‘Were you speaking to me?’—
said Emma, who had caught her own name.—‘Not absolutely’—he
answered—‘but I was thinking of you,—as many at a greater
distance are probably doing at this moment.—Fine open weather
Miss Emma!—Charming season for Hunting.’ ‘Emma is delightful,
is not she?’—whispered Margaret. ‘I have found her more than
answer my warmest hopes.—Did you ever see anything more
perfectly beautiful? I think even you must be a convert to a brown
complexion.’—He hesitated; Margaret was fair herself; and he did
not particularly want to compliment her; but Miss Osborne and
Miss Carr were likewise fair, and his devotion to them carried the
day. ‘Your Sister’s complexion,’ said he at last, ‘is as fine as a dark
complexion can be, but I still profess my preference of a white
skin. You have seen Miss Osborne?—she is my model for a truly
feminine complexion, and she is very fair.’—‘Is she fairer than
me?’—Tom made no reply.—‘Upon my Honour Ladies,’ said he,
giving a glance over his own person, ‘I am highly endebted to your
Condescension for admitting me, in such Dishabille into your
Drawing room. I really did not consider how unfit I was to be here
or I hope I should have kept my distance. Lady Osborne would tell
me that I were growing as careless as her son, if she saw me in this
condition.’—The Ladies were not wanting in civil returns; and
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
51
Robert Watson stealing a view of his own head in an opposite
glass,—said with equal civility, ‘You cannot be more in dishabille
than myself.—We got here so late, that I had not time even to put a
little fresh powder in my hair.’—Emma could not help entering
into what she supposed her Sister-in-law’s feelings at that
moment.—When the Tea-things were removed, Tom began to talk
of his Carriage—but the old Card Table being set out, and the fish
and counters with a tolerably clean pack brought forward from the
beaufit by Miss Watson, the general voice was so urgent with him
to join their party, that he agreed to allow himself another quarter
of an hour. Even Emma was pleased that he would stay, for she
was beginning to feel that a family party might be the worst of all
parties; and the others were delighted.—‘What’s your Game?’—
cried he, as they stood round the Table.—‘Speculation I believe,’
said Elizabeth—‘My Sister recommends it, and I fancy we all like
it. I know you do, Tom.’—‘It is the only round game played at
Croydon now,’ said Mrs. Robert—‘we never think of any other. I
am glad it is a favourite with you.’—‘Oh! me!’ cried Tom.
‘Whatever you decide on, will be a favourite with me.—I have had
some pleasant hours at Speculation in my time—but I have not
been in the way of it now for a long while.—Vingt-un is the game
at Osborne Castle; I have played nothing but Vingt-un of late. You
would be astonished to hear the noise we make there.—The fine
old, lofty Drawingroom rings again. Lady Osborne sometimes
declares she cannot hear herself speak.—Lord Osborne enjoys it
famously—he makes the best Dealer without exception that I ever
beheld—such quickness and spirit! he lets nobody dream over
their cards—I wish you could see him overdraw himself on both
his own cards—it is worth anything in the World!’—‘Dear me!’—
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
52
cried Margaret ‘why should not we play at Vingt-un?—I think it is
a much better game than Speculation. I cannot say I am very fond
of Speculation.’ Mrs. Robert offered not another word in support
of the game.—She was quite vanquished, and the fashions of
Osborne Castle carried it over the fashions of Croydon.—‘Do you
see much of the Parsonage family at the Castle, Mr. Musgrave?’
said Emma, as they were taking their seats.—‘Oh! yes—they are
almost always there. Mrs. Blake is a nice little good-humoured
Woman, she and I are sworn friends; and Howard’s a very
gentlemanlike good sort of fellow!—You are not forgotten I assure
you by any of the party. I fancy you must have a little cheek-
glowing now and then Miss Emma. Were you not rather warm last
Saturday about 9 or 10 o’clock in the Evening? I will tell you how
it was.—I see you are dieing to know.—Says Howard to Lord
Osborne—’ At this interesting moment he was called on by the
others, to regulate the game and determine some disputable point;
and his attention was so totally engaged in the business and
afterwards by the course of the game as never to revert to what he
had been saying before;—and Emma, tho’ suffering a good deal
from Curiosity, dared not remind him.—He proved a very useful
addition to their Table; without him, it would have been a party of
such very near relations as could have felt little Interest, and
perhaps maintained little complaisance, but his presence gave
variety and secured good manners.—He was in fact excellently
qualified to shine at a round Game; and few situations made him
appear to greater advantage. He played with spirit, and had a
great deal to say and tho’ with no wit himself; could sometimes
make use of the wit of an absent friend; and had a lively way of
retailing a commonplace, or saying a mere nothing, that had great
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
53
effect at a Card Table. The ways, and good Jokes of Osborne
Castle were now added to his ordinary means of Entertainment;
he repeated the smart sayings of one Lady, detailed the oversights
of another, and indulged them even with a copy of Lord Osborne’s
stile of overdrawing himself on both cards.—The Clock struck
nine, while he was thus agreably occupied; and when Nanny came
in with her Master’s Bason of Gruel, he had the pleasure of
observing to Mr. Watson that he should leave him at supper, while
he went home to dinner himself.—The Carriage was ordered to
the door—and no entreaties for his staying longer could now
avail,—for he well knew, that if he staid he must sit down to
supper in less than ten minutes—which to a Man whose heart had
been long fixed on calling his next meal a Dinner, was quite
insupportable.—On finding him determined to go, Margaret began
to wink and nod at Elizabeth to ask him to dinner for the following
day; and Elizabeth at last not able to resist hints, which her own
hospitable, social temper more than half seconded, gave the
invitation. ‘Would he give Robert the meeting, they should be very
happy.’ ‘With the greatest pleasure’—was his first reply. In a
moment afterwards—‘That is if I can possibly get here in time—
but I shoot with Lord Osborne, and therefore must not engage—
You will not think of me unless you see me.’—And so, he departed,
delighted with the uncertainty in which he had left it.
——————
Margaret in the joy of her heart under circumstances which she
chose to consider as peculiarly propitious, would willingly have
made a confidante of Emma when they were alone for a short time
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
54
the next morning; and had proceeded so far as to say—‘The young
man who was here last night my dear Emma and returns today, is
more interesting to me, than perhaps you may be aware—’ but
Emma pretending to understand nothing extraordinary in the
words, made some very inapplicable reply, and jumping up, ran
away from a subject which was odious to her feelings.
As Margaret would not allow a doubt to be repeated of
Musgrave’s coming to dinner, preparations were made for his
Entertainment much exceeding what had been deemed necessary
the day before; and taking the office of superintendance intirely
from her sister, she was half the morning in the Kitchen herself
directing and scolding.—After a great deal of indifferent Cooking,
and anxious Suspense however they were obliged to sit down
without their Guest.—T. Musgrave never came, and Margaret was
at no pains to conceal her vexation under the disappointment, or
repress the peevishness of her Temper. The Peace of the party for
the remainder of that day, and the whole of the next, which
comprised the length of Robert and Jane’s visit, was continually
invaded by her fretful displeasure, and querulous attacks.—
Elizabeth was the usual object of both. Margaret had just respect
enough for her Brother and Sister’s opinion, to behave properly
by them, but Elizabeth and the maids could never do anything
right—and Emma, whom she seemed no longer to think about,
found the continuance of the gentle voice beyond her calculation
short. Eager to be as little among them as possible, Emma was
delighted with the alternative of sitting above, with her father, and
warmly entreated to be his constant Companion each Evening—
and as Elizabeth loved company of any kind too well, not to prefer
being below, at all risks, as she had rather talk of Croydon to Jane,
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
55
with every interruption of Margaret’s perverseness, than sit with
only her father, who frequently could not endure Talking at all,
the affair was so settled, as soon as she could be persuaded to
believe it no sacrifice on her Sister’s part.—To Emma, the
exchange was most acceptable, and delightful. Her father, if ill,
required little more than gentleness and silence; and, being a Man
of Sense and Education, was if able to converse, a welcome
companion.
In his chamber, Emma was at peace from the dreadful
mortifications of unequal Society, and family Discord—from the
immediate endurance of Hard-hearted prosperity, low-minded
Conceit, and wrong-headed folly, engrafted on an untoward
Disposition.—She still suffered from them in the Contemplation of
their existence; in memory and in prospect, but for the moment,
she ceased to be tortured by their effects.—She was at leisure, she
could read and think,—tho’ her situation was hardly such as to
make reflection very soothing. The Evils arising from the loss of
her Uncle, were neither trifling, nor likely to lessen; and when
Thought had been freely indulged, in contrasting the past and the
present, the employment of mind, the dissipation of unpleasant
ideas which only reading could produce, made her thankfully turn
to a book.—The change in her home society, and stile of Life in
consequence of the death of one friend and the imprudence of
another had indeed been striking.—From being the first object of
Hope and Solicitude of an Uncle who had formed her mind with
the care of a Parent, and of Tenderness to an Aunt whose amiable
temper had delighted to give her every indulgence, from being the
Life and Spirit of a House, where all had been comfort and
Elegance, and the expected Heiress of an easy Independance, she
Jane Austen: The Watsons
Classics in Literature: Jane Austen                                                                                        ElecBook
56
was become of importance to no one, a burden on those, whose
affection she could not expect, an addition in an House, already
overstocked, surrounded by inferior minds with little chance of
domestic comfort, and as little hope of future support.—It was well
for her that she was naturally chearful;—for the Change had been
such as might have plunged weak spirits in Despondence.
She was very much pressed by Robert and Jane to return with
them to Croydon, and had some difficulty in getting a refusal
accepted; as they thought too highly of their own kindness and
situation, to suppose the offer could appear in a less advantageous
light to anybody else.—Elizabeth gave them her interest, tho’
evidently against her own, in privately urging Emma to go—‘You
do not know what you refuse Emma’—said she—‘nor what you
have to bear at home.—I would advise you by all means to accept
the invitation, there is always something lively going on at
Croydon, you will be in company almost every day, and Robert
and Jane will be very kind to you.—As for me, I shall be no worse
off without you, than I have been used to be; but poor Margaret’s
disagreable ways are new to you, and they would vex you more
than you think for, if you stay at home.’ Emma was of course
uninfluenced, except to greater esteem for Elizabeth, by such
representations—and the Visitors departed without her.
